“Let it be so now, for thus it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness.”
“It is written, “‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of God.’”
“Again it is written, ‘You shall not put the Lord your God to the test.’”  
“Be gone, Satan! For it is written, “‘You shall worship the Lord your God and him only shall you serve.’”  
“Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.”
“Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.”
“Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.   “Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted.   “Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.   “Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.   “Blessed are the merciful, for they shall receive mercy.   “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.   “Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called sons  of God.   “Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.   “Blessed are you when others revile you and persecute you and utter all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account.   Rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven, for so they persecuted the prophets who were before you. Salt and Light   “You are the salt of the earth, but if salt has lost its taste, how shall its saltiness be restored? It is no longer good for anything except to be thrown out and trampled under people's feet.   “You are the light of the world. A city set on a hill cannot be hidden.   Nor do people light a lamp and put it under a basket, but on a stand, and it gives light to all in the house.   In the same way, let your light shine before others, so that  they may see your good works and give glory to your Father who is in heaven. Christ Came to Fulfill the Law   “Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them.   For truly, I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not an iota, not a dot, will pass from the Law until all is accomplished.   Therefore whoever relaxes one of the least of these commandments and teaches others to do the same will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in the kingdom of heaven.   For I tell you, unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven. Anger   “You have heard that it was said to those of old, ‘You shall not murder; and whoever murders will be liable to judgment.’   But I say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother  will be liable to judgment; whoever insults  his brother will be liable to the council; and whoever says, ‘You fool!’ will be liable to the hell  of fire.   So if you are offering your gift at the altar and there remember that your brother has something against you,   leave your gift there before the altar and go. First be reconciled to your brother, and then come and offer your gift.   Come to terms quickly with your accuser while you are going with him to court, lest your accuser hand you over to the judge, and the judge to the guard, and you be put in prison.   Truly, I say to you, you will never get out until you have paid the last penny.  Lust   “You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall not commit adultery.’   But I say to you that everyone who looks at a woman with lustful intent has already committed adultery with her in his heart.   If your right eye causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it away. For it is better that you lose one of your members than that your whole body be thrown into hell.   And if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away. For it is better that you lose one of your members than that your whole body go into hell. Divorce   “It was also said, ‘Whoever divorces his wife, let him give her a certificate of divorce.’   But I say to you that everyone who divorces his wife, except on the ground of sexual immorality, makes her commit adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery. Oaths   “Again you have heard that it was said to those of old, ‘You shall not swear falsely, but shall perform to the Lord what you have sworn.’   But I say to you, Do not take an oath at all, either by heaven, for it is the throne of God,   or by the earth, for it is his footstool, or by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King.   And do not take an oath by your head, for you cannot make one hair white or black.   Let what you say be simply ‘Yes’ or ‘No’; anything more than this comes from evil.  Retaliation   “You have heard that it was said, ‘An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.’   But I say to you, Do not resist the one who is evil. But if anyone slaps you on the right cheek, turn to him the other also.   And if anyone would sue you and take your tunic,  let him have your cloak as well.   And if anyone forces you to go one mile, go with him two miles.   Give to the one who begs from you, and do not refuse the one who would borrow from you. Love Your Enemies   “You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’   But I say to you, Love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you,   so that you may be sons of your Father who is in heaven. For he makes his sun rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust.   For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have? Do not even the tax collectors do the same?   And if you greet only your brothers,  what more are you doing than others? Do not even the Gentiles do the same?   You therefore must be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect. Footnotes     Greek *huioi*; see Preface     Or *house. 16Let your light so shine before others that*     Some manuscripts insert *without cause*     Greek *says Raca to* (a term of abuse)     Greek *Gehenna*; also verses 29, 30     Greek *kodrantes*, Roman copper coin (Latin *quadrans*) worth about 1/64 of a *denarius* (which was a day's wage for a laborer)     Or *the evil one*     Greek *chiton*, a long garment worn under the cloak next to the skin     Or *brothers and sisters*. In New Testament usage, depending on the context, the plural Greek word *adelphoi* (translated “brothers”
“Beware of practicing your righteousness before other people in order to be seen by them, for then you will have no reward from your Father who is in heaven.   “Thus, when you give to the needy, sound no trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may be praised by others. Truly, I say to you, they have received their reward.   But when you give to the needy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,   so that your giving may be in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will reward you. The Lord's Prayer   “And when you pray, you must not be like the hypocrites. For they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and at the street corners, that they may be seen by others. Truly, I say to you, they have received their reward.   But when you pray, go into your room and shut the door and pray to your Father who is in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will reward you.   “And when you pray, do not heap up empty phrases as the Gentiles do, for they think that they will be heard for their many words.   Do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need before you ask him.   Pray then like this: “Our Father in heaven, hallowed be your name.    Your kingdom come, your will be done,  on earth as it is in heaven.   Give us this day our daily bread,    and forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.   And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.    For if you forgive others their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you,   but if you do not forgive others their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. Fasting   “And when you fast, do not look gloomy like the hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces that their fasting may be seen by others. Truly, I say to you, they have received their reward.   But when you fast, anoint your head and wash your face,   that your fasting may not be seen by others but by your Father who is in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will reward you. Lay Up Treasures in Heaven   “Do not lay up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust  destroy and where thieves break in and steal,   but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys and where thieves do not break in and steal.   For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.   “The eye is the lamp of the body. So, if your eye is healthy, your whole body will be full of light,   but if your eye is bad, your whole body will be full of darkness. If then the light in you is darkness, how great is the darkness!   “No one can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and money.  Do Not Be Anxious   “Therefore I tell you, do not be anxious about your life, what you will eat or what you will drink, nor about your body, what you will put on. Is not life more than food, and the body more than clothing?   Look at the birds of the air: they neither sow nor reap nor gather into barns, and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not of more value than they?   And which of you by being anxious can add a single hour to his span of life?  Footnotes     Or *Let your name be kept holy*, or *Let your name be treated with reverence*     Or *Let your kingdom come, let your will be done*     Or *our bread for tomorrow*     Or *the evil one*; some manuscripts add *For yours is the kingdom and the power and the glory, forever. Amen*     Or *worm*; also verse 20     Greek *mammon*, a Semitic word for money or possessions     Or *a single cubit to his stature*; a *cubit* was about 18 inches or 45 centimeters  
“I will; be clean.”
“See that you say nothing to anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a proof to them.”
“I will come and heal him.”  
“Truly, I tell you, with no one in Israel  have I found such faith.   I tell you, many will come from east and west and recline at table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven,   while the sons of the kingdom will be thrown into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”
“Go; let it be done for you as you have believed.”
“Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.”  
“Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their own dead.”  
“Why are you afraid, O you of little faith?”
“Go.” 
“Take heart, my son; your sins are forgiven.”  
“Why do you think evil in your hearts?   For which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Rise and walk’?   But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins”
“Rise, pick up your bed and go home.”
“Follow me.”
“Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick.   Go and learn what this means: ‘I desire mercy, and not sacrifice.’ For I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.”  
“Can the wedding guests mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them? The days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they will fast.   No one puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment, for the patch tears away from the garment, and a worse tear is made.   Neither is new wine put into old wineskins. If it is, the skins burst and the wine is spilled and the skins are destroyed. But new wine is put into fresh wineskins, and so both are preserved.”  
“Take heart, daughter; your faith has made you well.”
“Go away, for the girl is not dead but sleeping.”
“Do you believe that I am able to do this?”
“According to your faith be it done to you.”
“See that no one knows about it.”  
“The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few;  
“Go nowhere among the Gentiles and enter no town of the Samaritans,   but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.   And proclaim as you go, saying, ‘The kingdom of heaven is at hand.’    Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse lepers,  cast out demons. You received without paying; give without pay.   Acquire no gold or silver or copper for your belts,   no bag for your journey, or two tunics  or sandals or a staff, for the laborer deserves his food.   And whatever town or village you enter, find out who is worthy in it and stay there until you depart.   As you enter the house, greet it.   And if the house is worthy, let your peace come upon it, but if it is not worthy, let your peace return to you.   And if anyone will not receive you or listen to your words, shake off the dust from your feet when you leave that house or town.   Truly, I say to you, it will be more bearable on the day of judgment for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah than for that town. Persecution Will Come   “Behold, I am sending you out as sheep in the midst of wolves, so be wise as serpents and innocent as doves.   Beware of men, for they will deliver you over to courts and flog you in their synagogues,   and you will be dragged before governors and kings for my sake, to bear witness before them and the Gentiles.   When they deliver you over, do not be anxious how you are to speak or what you are to say, for what you are to say will be given to you in that hour.   For it is not you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you.   Brother will deliver brother over to death, and the father his child, and children will rise against parents and have them put to death,   and you will be hated by all for my name's sake. But the one who endures to the end will be saved.   When they persecute you in one town, flee to the next, for truly, I say to you, you will not have gone through all the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes.   “A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant  above his master.   It is enough for the disciple to be like his teacher, and the servant like his master. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, how much more will they malign  those of his household. Have No Fear   “So have no fear of them, for nothing is covered that will not be revealed, or hidden that will not be known.   What I tell you in the dark, say in the light, and what you hear whispered, proclaim on the housetops.   And do not fear those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul. Rather fear him who can destroy both soul and body in hell.    Are not two sparrows sold for a penny?  And not one of them will fall to the ground apart from your Father.   But even the hairs of your head are all numbered.   Fear not, therefore; you are of more value than many sparrows.   So everyone who acknowledges me before men, I also will acknowledge before my Father who is in heaven,   but whoever denies me before men, I also will deny before my Father who is in heaven. Not Peace, but a Sword   “Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the earth. I have not come to bring peace, but a sword.   For I have come to set a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.   And a person's enemies will be those of his own household.   Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me, and whoever loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.   And whoever does not take his cross and follow me is not worthy of me.   Whoever finds his life will lose it, and whoever loses his life for my sake will find it. Rewards   “Whoever receives you receives me, and whoever receives me receives him who sent me.   The one who receives a prophet because he is a prophet will receive a prophet's reward, and the one who receives a righteous person because he is a righteous person will receive a righteous person's reward.   And whoever gives one of these little ones even a cup of cold water because he is a disciple, truly, I say to you, he will by no means lose his reward.” Footnotes     Or *The kingdom of heaven has come near*     *Leprosy* was a term for several skin diseases; see Leviticus 13     Greek *chiton*, a long garment worn under the cloak next to the skin     Or *bondservant*; also verse 25     Greek lacks *will they malign*     Greek *Gehenna*     Greek *assarion*, Roman copper coin (Latin *quadrans*) worth about 1/16 of a *denarius* (which was a day's wage for a laborer)  
“Go and tell John what you hear and see:   the blind receive their sight and the lame walk, lepers  are cleansed and the deaf hear, and the dead are raised up, and the poor have good news preached to them.   And blessed is the one who is not offended by me.”
“What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?   What then did you go out to see? A man  dressed in soft clothing? Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in kings' houses.   What then did you go out to see? A prophet?  Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.   This is he of whom it is written, “‘Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you.’   Truly, I say to you, among those born of women there has arisen no one greater than John the Baptist. Yet the one who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.   From the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence,  and the violent take it by force.   For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John,   and if you are willing to accept it, he is Elijah who is to come.   He who has ears to hear,  let him hear.   “But to what shall I compare this generation? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces and calling to their playmates,   “‘We played the flute for you, and you did not dance; we sang a dirge, and you did not mourn.’   For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘He has a demon.’   The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Look at him! A glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ Yet wisdom is justified by her deeds.”  Footnotes     *Leprosy* was a term for several skin diseases; see Leviticus 13     Or *Why then did you go out? To see a man . . .*     Some manuscripts *Why then did you go out? To see a prophet?*     Or *has been coming violently*     Some manuscripts omit *to hear*     Some manuscripts *children* (compare Luke  )  
“Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.   But I tell you, it will be more bearable on the day of judgment for Tyre and Sidon than for you.   And you, Capernaum, will you be exalted to heaven? You will be brought down to Hades. For if the mighty works done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.   But I tell you that it will be more tolerable on the day of judgment for the land of Sodom than for you.”

“I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you have hidden these things from the wise and understanding and revealed them to little children;   yes, Father, for such was your gracious will.    All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and anyone to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.   Come to me, all who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.   Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest for your souls.   For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.” Footnotes     Or *for so it pleased you well*  

“Have you not read what David did when he was hungry, and those who were with him:   how he entered the house of God and ate the bread of the Presence, which it was not lawful for him to eat nor for those who were with him, but only for the priests?   Or have you not read in the Law how on the Sabbath the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath and are guiltless?   I tell you, something greater than the temple is here.   And if you had known what this means, ‘I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the guiltless.   For the Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.”  

“Which one of you who has a sheep, if it falls into a pit on the Sabbath, will not take hold of it and lift it out?   Of how much more value is a man than a sheep! So it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath.”

“Stretch out your hand.”

“Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and no city or house divided against itself will stand.   And if Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand?   And if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore they will be your judges.   But if it is by the Spirit of God that I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.   Or how can someone enter a strong man's house and plunder his goods, unless he first binds the strong man? Then indeed he may plunder his house.   Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.   Therefore I tell you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven people, but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven.   And whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, either in this age or in the age to come. A Tree Is Known by Its Fruit   “Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree bad and its fruit bad, for the tree is known by its fruit.   You brood of vipers! How can you speak good, when you are evil? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.   The good person out of his good treasure brings forth good, and the evil person out of his evil treasure brings forth evil.   I tell you, on the day of judgment people will give account for every careless word they speak,   for by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned.”  

“An evil and adulterous generation seeks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah.   For just as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the great fish, so will the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.   The men of Nineveh will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, something greater than Jonah is here.   The queen of the South will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, something greater than Solomon is here. Return of an Unclean Spirit   “When the unclean spirit has gone out of a person, it passes through waterless places seeking rest, but finds none.   Then it says, ‘I will return to my house from which I came.’ And when it comes, it finds the house empty, swept, and put in order.   Then it goes and brings with it seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they enter and dwell there, and the last state of that person is worse than the first. So also will it be with this evil generation.”  

“Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?”
“Here are my mother and my brothers!   For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.”  

“A sower went out to sow.   And as he sowed, some seeds fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured them.   Other seeds fell on rocky ground, where they did not have much soil, and immediately they sprang up, since they had no depth of soil,   but when the sun rose they were scorched. And since they had no root, they withered away.   Other seeds fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked them.   Other seeds fell on good soil and produced grain, some a hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.   He who has ears,  let him hear.” Footnotes     Some manuscripts add here and in verse 43 *to hear*  
 And he answered them, 
 
 “To you it has been given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it has not been given.   For to the one who has, more will be given, and he will have an abundance, but from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away.   This is why I speak to them in parables, because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not hear, nor do they understand.   Indeed, in their case the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled that says: “‘“You will indeed hear but never understand, and you will indeed see but never perceive.”   For this people's heart has grown dull, and with their ears they can barely hear, and their eyes they have closed, lest they should see with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their heart and turn, and I would heal them.’   But blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear.   For truly, I say to you, many prophets and righteous people longed to see what you see, and did not see it, and to hear what you hear, and did not hear it. The Parable of the Sower Explained   “Hear then the parable of the sower:   When anyone hears the word of the kingdom and does not understand it, the evil one comes and snatches away what has been sown in his heart. This is what was sown along the path.   As for what was sown on rocky ground, this is the one who hears the word and immediately receives it with joy,   yet he has no root in himself, but endures for a while, and when tribulation or persecution arises on account of the word, immediately he falls away.    As for what was sown among thorns, this is the one who hears the word, but the cares of the world and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and it proves unfruitful.   As for what was sown on good soil, this is the one who hears the word and understands it. He indeed bears fruit and yields, in one case a hundredfold, in another sixty, and in another thirty.”
 
“The kingdom of heaven may be compared to a man who sowed good seed in his field,   but while his men were sleeping, his enemy came and sowed weeds  among the wheat and went away.   So when the plants came up and bore grain, then the weeds appeared also.   And the servants  of the master of the house came and said to him, ‘Master, did you not sow good seed in your field? How then does it have weeds?’   He said to them, ‘An enemy has done this.’ So the servants said to him, ‘Then do you want us to go and gather them?’   But he said, ‘No, lest in gathering the weeds you root up the wheat along with them.   Let both grow together until the harvest, and at harvest time I will tell the reapers, “Gather the weeds first and bind them in bundles to be burned, but gather the wheat into my barn.”

“The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustard seed that a man took and sowed in his field.   It is the smallest of all seeds, but when it has grown it is larger than all the garden plants and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come and make nests in its branches.”

“The kingdom of heaven is like leaven that a woman took and hid in three measures of flour, till it was all leavened.”

“The one who sows the good seed is the Son of Man.   The field is the world, and the good seed is the sons of the kingdom. The weeds are the sons of the evil one,   and the enemy who sowed them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are angels.   Just as the weeds are gathered and burned with fire, so will it be at the end of the age.   The Son of Man will send his angels, and they will gather out of his kingdom all causes of sin and all law-breakers,   and throw them into the fiery furnace. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.   Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He who has ears, let him hear. The Parable of the Hidden Treasure   “The kingdom of heaven is like treasure hidden in a field, which a man found and covered up. Then in his joy he goes and sells all that he has and buys that field. The Parable of the Pearl of Great Value   “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant in search of fine pearls,   who, on finding one pearl of great value, went and sold all that he had and bought it. The Parable of the Net   “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was thrown into the sea and gathered fish of every kind.   When it was full, men drew it ashore and sat down and sorted the good into containers but threw away the bad.   So it will be at the end of the age. The angels will come out and separate the evil from the righteous   and throw them into the fiery furnace. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. New and Old Treasures   “Have you understood all these things?” 

“Therefore every scribe who has been trained for the kingdom of heaven is like a master of a house, who brings out of his treasure what is new and what is old.”  
“A prophet is not without honor except in his hometown and in his own household.”  
“They need not go away; you give them something to eat.”  
“Bring them here to me.”  
“Take heart; it is I. Do not be afraid.”  
“Come.”
“O you of little faith, why did you doubt?”  
“And why do you break the commandment of God for the sake of your tradition?   For God commanded, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and, ‘Whoever reviles father or mother must surely die.’   But you say, ‘If anyone tells his father or his mother, “What you would have gained from me is given to God,”    he need not honor his father.’ So for the sake of your tradition you have made void the word  of God.   You hypocrites! Well did Isaiah prophesy of you, when he said:   “‘This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me;   in vain do they worship me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.’”

“Hear and understand:   it is not what goes into the mouth that defiles a person, but what comes out of the mouth; this defiles a person.”

“Are you also still without understanding?   Do you not see that whatever goes into the mouth passes into the stomach and is expelled?    But what comes out of the mouth proceeds from the heart, and this defiles a person.   For out of the heart come evil thoughts, murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false witness, slander.   These are what defile a person. But to eat with unwashed hands does not defile anyone.”
“I was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”  
“It is not right to take the children's bread and throw it to the dogs.”  
“O woman, great is your faith! Be it done for you as you desire.”

“I have compassion on the crowd because they have been with me now three days and have nothing to eat. And I am unwilling to send them away hungry, lest they faint on the way.”  
“How many loaves do you have?” 
“When it is evening, you say, ‘It will be fair weather, for the sky is red.’   And in the morning, ‘It will be stormy today, for the sky is red and threatening.’ You know how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but you cannot interpret the signs of the times.   An evil and adulterous generation seeks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah.” 
“Watch and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”  
“O you of little faith, why are you discussing among yourselves the fact that you have no bread?   Do you not yet perceive? Do you not remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many baskets you gathered?   Or the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many baskets you gathered?   How is it that you fail to understand that I did not speak about bread? Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”  
“Who do people say that the Son of Man is?”  
“But who do you say that I am?”  
“Blessed are you, Simon Bar-Jonah! For flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven.   And I tell you, you are Peter, and on this rock  I will build my church, and the gates of hell  shall not prevail against it.   I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed  in heaven.”

“Get behind me, Satan! You are a hindrance  to me. For you are not setting your mind on the things of God, but on the things of man.” Take Up Your Cross and Follow Jesus   Then “If anyone would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.   For whoever would save his life  will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will find it.   For what will it profit a man if he gains the whole world and forfeits his soul? Or what shall a man give in return for his soul?   For the Son of Man is going to come with his angels in the glory of his Father, and then he will repay each person according to what he has done.   Truly, I say to you, there are some standing here who will not taste death until they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.”
“Rise, and have no fear.”  
“Tell no one the vision, until the Son of Man is raised from the dead.”  
“Elijah does come, and he will restore all things.   But I tell you that Elijah has already come, and they did not recognize him, but did to him whatever they pleased. So also the Son of Man will certainly suffer at their hands.”  
“O faithless and twisted generation, how long am I to be with you? How long am I to bear with you? Bring him here to me.”  
“Because of your little faith. For truly, I say to you, if you have faith like a grain of mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move, and nothing will be impossible for you.”
“The Son of Man is about to be delivered into the hands of men,   and they will kill him, and he will be raised on the third day.”
“Yes.”
“What do you think, Simon? From whom do kings of the earth take toll or tax? From their sons or from others?”
“From others,”
“Then the sons are free.   However, not to give offense to them, go to the sea and cast a hook and take the first fish that comes up, and when you open its mouth you will find a shekel.  Take that and give it to them for me and for yourself.”
“Truly, I say to you, unless you turn and become like children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.   Whoever humbles himself like this child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.   “Whoever receives one such child in my name receives me,   but whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin,  it would be better for him to have a great millstone fastened around his neck and to be drowned in the depth of the sea. Temptations to Sin   “Woe to the world for temptations to sin!  For it is necessary that temptations come, but woe to the one by whom the temptation comes!   And if your hand or your foot causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away. It is better for you to enter life crippled or lame than with two hands or two feet to be thrown into the eternal fire.   And if your eye causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it away. It is better for you to enter life with one eye than with two eyes to be thrown into the hell  of fire. The Parable of the Lost Sheep   “See that you do not despise one of these little ones. For I tell you that in heaven their angels always see the face of my Father who is in heaven.    What do you think? If a man has a hundred sheep, and one of them has gone astray, does he not leave the ninety-nine on the mountains and go in search of the one that went astray?   And if he finds it, truly, I say to you, he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine that never went astray.   So it is not the will of my  Father who is in heaven that one of these little ones should perish. If Your Brother Sins Against You   “If your brother sins against you, go and tell him his fault, between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained your brother.   But if he does not listen, take one or two others along with you, that every charge may be established by the evidence of two or three witnesses.   If he refuses to listen to them, tell it to the church. And if he refuses to listen even to the church, let him be to you as a Gentile and a tax collector.   Truly, I say to you, whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed  in heaven.   Again I say to you, if two of you agree on earth about anything they ask, it will be done for them by my Father in heaven.   For where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I among them.”
“I do not say to you seven times, but seventy-seven times.   “Therefore the kingdom of heaven may be compared to a king who wished to settle accounts with his servants.    When he began to settle, one was brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents.    And since he could not pay, his master ordered him to be sold, with his wife and children and all that he had, and payment to be made.   So the servant  fell on his knees, imploring him, ‘Have patience with me, and I will pay you everything.’   And out of pity for him, the master of that servant released him and forgave him the debt.   But when that same servant went out, he found one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred denarii,  and seizing him, he began to choke him, saying, ‘Pay what you owe.’   So his fellow servant fell down and pleaded with him, ‘Have patience with me, and I will pay you.’   He refused and went and put him in prison until he should pay the debt.   When his fellow servants saw what had taken place, they were greatly distressed, and they went and reported to their master all that had taken place.   Then his master summoned him and said to him, ‘You wicked servant! I forgave you all that debt because you pleaded with me.   And should not you have had mercy on your fellow servant, as I had mercy on you?’   And in anger his master delivered him to the jailers,  until he should pay all his debt.   So also my heavenly Father will do to every one of you, if you do not forgive your brother from your heart.”

“Have you not read that he who created them from the beginning made them male and female,   and said, ‘Therefore a man shall leave his father and his mother and hold fast to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh’?   So they are no longer two but one flesh. What therefore God has joined together, let not man separate.”  
“Because of your hardness of heart Moses allowed you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it was not so.   And I say to you: whoever divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another, commits adultery.”
“Not everyone can receive this saying, but only those to whom it is given.   For there are eunuchs who have been so from birth, and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by men, and there are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. Let the one who is able to receive this receive it.”  
“Let the little children come to me and do not hinder them, for to such belongs the kingdom of heaven.”  
“Why do you ask me about what is good? There is only one who is good. If you would enter life, keep the commandments.”
“You shall not murder, You shall not commit adultery, You shall not steal, You shall not bear false witness,   Honor your father and mother, and, You shall love your neighbor as yourself.”  
“If you would be perfect, go, sell what you possess and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me.”  
“Truly, I say to you, only with difficulty will a rich person enter the kingdom of heaven.   Again I tell you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.”  
“With man this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.”  
“Truly, I say to you, in the new world,  when the Son of Man will sit on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.   And everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or lands, for my name's sake, will receive a hundredfold  and will inherit eternal life.   But many who are first will be last, and the last first.
“For the kingdom of heaven is like a master of a house who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard.   After agreeing with the laborers for a denarius  a day, he sent them into his vineyard.   And going out about the third hour he saw others standing idle in the marketplace,   and to them he said, ‘You go into the vineyard too, and whatever is right I will give you.’   So they went. Going out again about the sixth hour and the ninth hour, he did the same.   And about the eleventh hour he went out and found others standing. And he said to them, ‘Why do you stand here idle all day?’   They said to him, ‘Because no one has hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You go into the vineyard too.’   And when evening came, the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman, ‘Call the laborers and pay them their wages, beginning with the last, up to the first.’   And when those hired about the eleventh hour came, each of them received a denarius.   Now when those hired first came, they thought they would receive more, but each of them also received a denarius.   And on receiving it they grumbled at the master of the house,   saying, ‘These last worked only one hour, and you have made them equal to us who have borne the burden of the day and the scorching heat.’   But he replied to one of them, ‘Friend, I am doing you no wrong. Did you not agree with me for a denarius?   Take what belongs to you and go. I choose to give to this last worker as I give to you.   Am I not allowed to do what I choose with what belongs to me? Or do you begrudge my generosity?’    So the last will be first, and the first last.”
“See, we are going up to Jerusalem. And the Son of Man will be delivered over to the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn him to death   and deliver him over to the Gentiles to be mocked and flogged and crucified, and he will be raised on the third day.”  
“What do you want?”
“You do not know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I am to drink?”
“You will drink my cup, but to sit at my right hand and at my left is not mine to grant, but it is for those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.”  
“You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them.   It shall not be so among you. But whoever would be great among you must be your servant,    and whoever would be first among you must be your slave,    even as the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”
“What do you want me to do for you?”  
“Go into the village in front of you, and immediately you will find a donkey tied, and a colt with her. Untie them and bring them to me.   If anyone says anything to you, you shall say, ‘The Lord needs them,’ and he will send them at once.”  
“It is written, ‘My house shall be called a house of prayer,’ but you make it a den of robbers.”  
“Yes; have you never read, “‘Out of the mouth of infants and nursing babies you have prepared praise’?”  
“May no fruit ever come from you again!”
“Truly, I say to you, if you have faith and do not doubt, you will not only do what has been done to the fig tree, but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be taken up and thrown into the sea,’ it will happen.   And whatever you ask in prayer, you will receive, if you have faith.” 

“I also will ask you one question, and if you tell me the answer, then I also will tell you by what authority I do these things.   The baptism of John, from where did it come? From heaven or from man?”

“Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things. The Parable of the Two Sons   “What do you think? A man had two sons. And he went to the first and said, ‘Son, go and work in the vineyard today.’   And he answered, ‘I will not,’ but afterward he changed his mind and went.   And he went to the other son and said the same. And he answered, ‘I go, sir,’ but did not go.   Which of the two did the will of his father?”
“Truly, I say to you, the tax collectors and the prostitutes go into the kingdom of God before you.   For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him. And even when you saw it, you did not afterward change your minds and believe him. The Parable of the Tenants   “Hear another parable. There was a master of a house who planted a vineyard and put a fence around it and dug a winepress in it and built a tower and leased it to tenants, and went into another country.   When the season for fruit drew near, he sent his servants  to the tenants to get his fruit.   And the tenants took his servants and beat one, killed another, and stoned another.   Again he sent other servants, more than the first. And they did the same to them.   Finally he sent his son to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’   But when the tenants saw the son, they said to themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him and have his inheritance.’   And they took him and threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.   When therefore the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants?”

“Have you never read in the Scriptures: “‘The stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone;  this was the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?   Therefore I tell you, the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a people producing its fruits.   And the one who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces; and when it falls on anyone, it will crush him.”

“The kingdom of heaven may be compared to a king who gave a wedding feast for his son,   and sent his servants  to call those who were invited to the wedding feast, but they would not come.   Again he sent other servants, saying, ‘Tell those who are invited, “See, I have prepared my dinner, my oxen and my fat calves have been slaughtered, and everything is ready. Come to the wedding feast.”’

“But when the king came in to look at the guests, he saw there a man who had no wedding garment.   And he said to him, ‘Friend, how did you get in here without a wedding garment?’ And he was speechless.   Then the king said to the attendants, ‘Bind him hand and foot and cast him into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’   For many are called, but few are chosen.”

“Why put me to the test, you hypocrites?   Show me the coin for the tax.”
“Whose likeness and inscription is this?”
“Therefore render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.”

“You are wrong, because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God.   For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven.   And as for the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was said to you by God:   ‘I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’? He is not God of the dead, but of the living.”  
“You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.   This is the great and first commandment.   And a second is like it: You shall love your neighbor as yourself.   On these two commandments depend all the Law and the Prophets.”  
“What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?”
“How is it then that David, in the Spirit, calls him Lord, saying,   “‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at my right hand, until I put your enemies under your feet”’?   If then David calls him Lord, how is he his son?”  
“The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat,   so do and observe whatever they tell you, but not the works they do. For they preach, but do not practice.   They tie up heavy burdens, hard to bear,  and lay them on people's shoulders, but they themselves are not willing to move them with their finger.   They do all their deeds to be seen by others. For they make their phylacteries broad and their fringes long,   and they love the place of honor at feasts and the best seats in the synagogues   and greetings in the marketplaces and being called rabbi  by others.   But you are not to be called rabbi, for you have one teacher, and you are all brothers.    And call no man your father on earth, for you have one Father, who is in heaven.   Neither be called instructors, for you have one instructor, the Christ.   The greatest among you shall be your servant.   Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.   “But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you shut the kingdom of heaven in people's faces. For you neither enter yourselves nor allow those who would enter to go in.    Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you travel across sea and land to make a single proselyte, and when he becomes a proselyte, you make him twice as much a child of hell  as yourselves.   “Woe to you, blind guides, who say, ‘If anyone swears by the temple, it is nothing, but if anyone swears by the gold of the temple, he is bound by his oath.’   You blind fools! For which is greater, the gold or the temple that has made the gold sacred?   And you say, ‘If anyone swears by the altar, it is nothing, but if anyone swears by the gift that is on the altar, he is bound by his oath.’   You blind men! For which is greater, the gift or the altar that makes the gift sacred?   So whoever swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it.   And whoever swears by the temple swears by it and by him who dwells in it.   And whoever swears by heaven swears by the throne of God and by him who sits upon it.   “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you tithe mint and dill and cumin, and have neglected the weightier matters of the law: justice and mercy and faithfulness. These you ought to have done, without neglecting the others.   You blind guides, straining out a gnat and swallowing a camel!   “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you clean the outside of the cup and the plate, but inside they are full of greed and self-indulgence.   You blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the cup and the plate, that the outside also may be clean.   “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like whitewashed tombs, which outwardly appear beautiful, but within are full of dead people's bones and all uncleanness.   So you also outwardly appear righteous to others, but within you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.   “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you build the tombs of the prophets and decorate the monuments of the righteous,   saying, ‘If we had lived in the days of our fathers, we would not have taken part with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.’   Thus you witness against yourselves that you are sons of those who murdered the prophets.   Fill up, then, the measure of your fathers.   You serpents, you brood of vipers, how are you to escape being sentenced to hell?   Therefore I send you prophets and wise men and scribes, some of whom you will kill and crucify, and some you will flog in your synagogues and persecute from town to town,   so that on you may come all the righteous blood shed on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah the son of Barachiah,  whom you murdered between the sanctuary and the altar.   Truly, I say to you, all these things will come upon this generation. Lament over Jerusalem   “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to it! How often would I have gathered your children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and you were not willing!   See, your house is left to you desolate.   For I tell you, you will not see me again, until you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.’”

“You see all these, do you not? Truly, I say to you, there will not be left here one stone upon another that will not be thrown down.”  
“See that no one leads you astray.   For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and they will lead many astray.   And you will hear of wars and rumors of wars. See that you are not alarmed, for this must take place, but the end is not yet.   For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be famines and earthquakes in various places.   All these are but the beginning of the birth pains.   “Then they will deliver you up to tribulation and put you to death, and you will be hated by all nations for my name's sake.   And then many will fall away  and betray one another and hate one another.   And many false prophets will arise and lead many astray.   And because lawlessness will be increased, the love of many will grow cold.   But the one who endures to the end will be saved.   And this gospel of the kingdom will be proclaimed throughout the whole world as a testimony to all nations, and then the end will come. The Abomination of Desolation   “So when you see the abomination of desolation spoken of by the prophet Daniel, standing in the holy place (let the reader understand),   then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains.   Let the one who is on the housetop not go down to take what is in his house,   and let the one who is in the field not turn back to take his cloak.   And alas for women who are pregnant and for those who are nursing infants in those days!   Pray that your flight may not be in winter or on a Sabbath.   For then there will be great tribulation, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now, no, and never will be.   And if those days had not been cut short, no human being would be saved. But for the sake of the elect those days will be cut short.   Then if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Christ!’ or ‘There he is!’ do not believe it.   For false christs and false prophets will arise and perform great signs and wonders, so as to lead astray, if possible, even the elect.   See, I have told you beforehand.   So, if they say to you, ‘Look, he is in the wilderness,’ do not go out. If they say, ‘Look, he is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it.   For as the lightning comes from the east and shines as far as the west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.   Wherever the corpse is, there the vultures will gather. The Coming of the Son of Man   “Immediately after the tribulation of those days the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.   Then will appear in heaven the sign of the Son of Man, and then all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.   And he will send out his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other. The Lesson of the Fig Tree   “From the fig tree learn its lesson: as soon as its branch becomes tender and puts out its leaves, you know that summer is near.   So also, when you see all these things, you know that he is near, at the very gates.   Truly, I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all these things take place.   Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away. No One Knows That Day and Hour   “But concerning that day and hour no one knows, not even the angels of heaven, nor the Son,  but the Father only.   For as were the days of Noah, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.   For as in those days before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day when Noah entered the ark,   and they were unaware until the flood came and swept them all away, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.   Then two men will be in the field; one will be taken and one left.   Two women will be grinding at the mill; one will be taken and one left.   Therefore, stay awake, for you do not know on what day your Lord is coming.   But know this, that if the master of the house had known in what part of the night the thief was coming, he would have stayed awake and would not have let his house be broken into.   Therefore you also must be ready, for the Son of Man is coming at an hour you do not expect.   “Who then is the faithful and wise servant,  whom his master has set over his household, to give them their food at the proper time?   Blessed is that servant whom his master will find so doing when he comes.   Truly, I say to you, he will set him over all his possessions.   But if that wicked servant says to himself, ‘My master is delayed,’   and begins to beat his fellow servants  and eats and drinks with drunkards,   the master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he does not know   and will cut him in pieces and put him with the hypocrites. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

“Then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps  and went to meet the bridegroom.    Five of them were foolish, and five were wise.   For when the foolish took their lamps, they took no oil with them,   but the wise took flasks of oil with their lamps.   As the bridegroom was delayed, they all became drowsy and slept.   But at midnight there was a cry, ‘Here is the bridegroom! Come out to meet him.’   Then all those virgins rose and trimmed their lamps.   And the foolish said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.’   But the wise answered, saying, ‘Since there will not be enough for us and for you, go rather to the dealers and buy for yourselves.’   And while they were going to buy, the bridegroom came, and those who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut.   Afterward the other virgins came also, saying, ‘Lord, lord, open to us.’   But he answered, ‘Truly, I say to you, I do not know you.’   Watch therefore, for you know neither the day nor the hour. The Parable of the Talents   “For it will be like a man going on a journey, who called his servants  and entrusted to them his property.   To one he gave five talents,  to another two, to another one, to each according to his ability. Then he went away.   He who had received the five talents went at once and traded with them, and he made five talents more.   So also he who had the two talents made two talents more.   But he who had received the one talent went and dug in the ground and hid his master's money.   Now after a long time the master of those servants came and settled accounts with them.   And he who had received the five talents came forward, bringing five talents more, saying, ‘Master, you delivered to me five talents; here, I have made five talents more.’   His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant.  You have been faithful over a little; I will set you over much. Enter into the joy of your master.’   And he also who had the two talents came forward, saying, ‘Master, you delivered to me two talents; here, I have made two talents more.’   His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a little; I will set you over much. Enter into the joy of your master.’   He also who had received the one talent came forward, saying, ‘Master, I knew you to be a hard man, reaping where you did not sow, and gathering where you scattered no seed,   so I was afraid, and I went and hid your talent in the ground. Here, you have what is yours.’   But his master answered him, ‘You wicked and slothful servant! You knew that I reap where I have not sown and gather where I scattered no seed?   Then you ought to have invested my money with the bankers, and at my coming I should have received what was my own with interest.   So take the talent from him and give it to him who has the ten talents.   For to everyone who has will more be given, and he will have an abundance. But from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away.   And cast the worthless servant into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’ The Final Judgment   “When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit on his glorious throne.   Before him will be gathered all the nations, and he will separate people one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.   And he will place the sheep on his right, but the goats on the left.   Then the King will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.   For I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, I was a stranger and you welcomed me,   I was naked and you clothed me, I was sick and you visited me, I was in prison and you came to me.’   Then the righteous will answer him, saying, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you drink?   And when did we see you a stranger and welcome you, or naked and clothe you?   And when did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’   And the King will answer them, ‘Truly, I say to you, as you did it to one of the least of these my brothers,  you did it to me.’   “Then he will say to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.   For I was hungry and you gave me no food, I was thirsty and you gave me no drink,   I was a stranger and you did not welcome me, naked and you did not clothe me, sick and in prison and you did not visit me.’   Then they also will answer, saying, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and did not minister to you?’   Then he will answer them, saying, ‘Truly, I say to you, as you did not do it to one of the least of these, you did not do it to me.’   And these will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.” 

“You know that after two days the Passover is coming, and the Son of Man will be delivered up to be crucified.”  
“Why do you trouble the woman? For she has done a beautiful thing to me.   For you always have the poor with you, but you will not always have me.   In pouring this ointment on my body, she has done it to prepare me for burial.   Truly, I say to you, wherever this gospel is proclaimed in the whole world, what she has done will also be told in memory of her.”  
“Go into the city to a certain man and say to him, ‘The Teacher says, My time is at hand. I will keep the Passover at your house with my disciples.’”  
“Truly, I say to you, one of you will betray me.”  
“He who has dipped his hand in the dish with me will betray me.   The Son of Man goes as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would have been better for that man if he had not been born.”   Judas, who would betray him, answered, “Is it I, Rabbi?”
“You have said so.”
“Take, eat; this is my body.”
“Drink of it, all of you,   for this is my blood of the  covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.   I tell you I will not drink again of this fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom.”
“You will all fall away because of me this night. For it is written, ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’   But after I am raised up, I will go before you to Galilee.”  
“Truly, I tell you, this very night, before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.”  
“Sit here, while I go over there and pray.”  
“My soul is very sorrowful, even to death; remain here, and watch  with me.”
“My Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as you will.”
“So, could you not watch with me one hour?   Watch and pray that you may not enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.”
“My Father, if this cannot pass unless I drink it, your will be done.”

“Sleep and take your rest later on.  See, the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.   Rise, let us be going; see, my betrayer is at hand.”
“Friend, do what you came to do.”

“Put your sword back into its place. For all who take the sword will perish by the sword.   Do you think that I cannot appeal to my Father, and he will at once send me more than twelve legions of angels?   But how then should the Scriptures be fulfilled, that it must be so?”

“Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs to capture me? Day after day I sat in the temple teaching, and you did not seize me.   But all this has taken place that the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.”

“You have said so. But I tell you, from now on you will see the Son of Man seated at the right hand of Power and coming on the clouds of heaven.”
“Before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.”
 
“Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani?”
“My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”  
“Do not be afraid; go and tell my brothers to go to Galilee, and there they will see me.”  
“All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me.   Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in  the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,   teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, to the end of the age.”
“The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand;  repent and believe in the gospel.”

“Follow me, and I will make you become fishers of men.”
“Be silent, and come out of him!” 
“I will; be clean.”  
“See that you say nothing to anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest and offer for your cleansing what Moses commanded, for a proof to them.”  
“Son, your sins are forgiven.”  
“Why do you question these things in your hearts?   Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Rise, take up your bed and walk’?   But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins”
“I say to you, rise, pick up your bed, and go home.”  
“Follow me.”
“Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.”  
“Can the wedding guests fast while the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.   The days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they will fast in that day.   No one sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment. If he does, the patch tears away from it, the new from the old, and a worse tear is made.   And no one puts new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the wine will burst the skins—and the wine is destroyed, and so are the skins. But new wine is for fresh wineskins.”  “Have you never read what David did, when he was in need and was hungry, he and those who were with him:   how he entered the house of God, in the time of  Abiathar the high priest, and ate the bread of the Presence, which it is not lawful for any but the priests to eat, and also gave it to those who were with him?”
“The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath.   So the Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath.”
“Come here.”
“Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do harm, to save life or to kill?”
“Stretch out your hand.”

“How can Satan cast out Satan?   If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.   And if a house is divided against itself, that house will not be able to stand.   And if Satan has risen up against himself and is divided, he cannot stand, but is coming to an end.   But no one can enter a strong man's house and plunder his goods, unless he first binds the strong man. Then indeed he may plunder his house.   “Truly, I say to you, all sins will be forgiven the children of man, and whatever blasphemies they utter,   but whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit never has forgiveness, but is guilty of an eternal sin”—  
“Who are my mother and my brothers?”
“Here are my mother and my brothers!   For whoever does the will of God, he is my brother and sister and mother.”  
“Listen! Behold, a sower went out to sow.   And as he sowed, some seed fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured it.   Other seed fell on rocky ground, where it did not have much soil, and immediately it sprang up, since it had no depth of soil.   And when the sun rose, it was scorched, and since it had no root, it withered away.   Other seed fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it, and it yielded no grain.   And other seeds fell into good soil and produced grain, growing up and increasing and yielding thirtyfold and sixtyfold and a hundredfold.”
“He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”  
“To you has been given the secret of the kingdom of God, but for those outside everything is in parables,   so that “‘they may indeed see but not perceive, and may indeed hear but not understand, lest they should turn and be forgiven.’”
“Do you not understand this parable? How then will you understand all the parables?   The sower sows the word.   And these are the ones along the path, where the word is sown: when they hear, Satan immediately comes and takes away the word that is sown in them.   And these are the ones sown on rocky ground: the ones who, when they hear the word, immediately receive it with joy.   And they have no root in themselves, but endure for a while; then, when tribulation or persecution arises on account of the word, immediately they fall away.    And others are the ones sown among thorns. They are those who hear the word,   but the cares of the world and the deceitfulness of riches and the desires for other things enter in and choke the word, and it proves unfruitful.   But those that were sown on the good soil are the ones who hear the word and accept it and bear fruit, thirtyfold and sixtyfold and a hundredfold.”
“Is a lamp brought in to be put under a basket, or under a bed, and not on a stand?   For nothing is hidden except to be made manifest; nor is anything secret except to come to light.   If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear.”
“Pay attention to what you hear: with the measure you use, it will be measured to you, and still more will be added to you.   For to the one who has, more will be given, and from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away.”

“The kingdom of God is as if a man should scatter seed on the ground.   He sleeps and rises night and day, and the seed sprouts and grows; he knows not how.   The earth produces by itself, first the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in the ear.   But when the grain is ripe, at once he puts in the sickle, because the harvest has come.”

“With what can we compare the kingdom of God, or what parable shall we use for it?   It is like a grain of mustard seed, which, when sown on the ground, is the smallest of all the seeds on earth,   yet when it is sown it grows up and becomes larger than all the garden plants and puts out large branches, so that the birds of the air can make nests in its shade.”

“Let us go across to the other side.”
“Peace! Be still!”
“Why are you so afraid? Have you still no faith?”  
“Come out of the man, you unclean spirit!”
“What is your name?”
“Go home to your friends and tell them how much the Lord has done for you, and how he has had mercy on you.”  
“Who touched my garments?”  
“Daughter, your faith has made you well; go in peace, and be healed of your disease.”  
“Do not fear, only believe.”

“Why are you making a commotion and weeping? The child is not dead but sleeping.”  
“Talitha cumi,”
“Little girl, I say to you, arise.”  
“A prophet is not without honor, except in his hometown and among his relatives and in his own household.”  
“Whenever you enter a house, stay there until you depart from there.   And if any place will not receive you and they will not listen to you, when you leave, shake off the dust that is on your feet as a testimony against them.”

“Come away by yourselves to a desolate place and rest a while.”
“You give them something to eat.”

“Shall we go and buy two hundred denarii  worth of bread and give it to them to eat?”

“How many loaves do you have? Go and see.”
“Take heart; it is I. Do not be afraid.”  
“Well did Isaiah prophesy of you hypocrites, as it is written, “‘This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me;   in vain do they worship me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.’   You leave the commandment of God and hold to the tradition of men.”“You have a fine way of rejecting the commandment of God in order to establish your tradition!   For Moses said, ‘Honor your father and your mother’; and, ‘Whoever reviles father or mother must surely die.’   But you say, ‘If a man tells his father or his mother, “Whatever you would have gained from me is Corban”’ (that is, given to God) —  then you no longer permit him to do anything for his father or mother,   thus making void the word of God by your tradition that you have handed down. And many such things you do.”

“Hear me, all of you, and understand:   There is nothing outside a person that by going into him can defile him, but the things that come out of a person are what defile him.”

“Then are you also without understanding? Do you not see that whatever goes into a person from outside cannot defile him,   since it enters not his heart but his stomach, and is expelled?”

“What comes out of a person is what defiles him.   For from within, out of the heart of man, come evil thoughts, sexual immorality, theft, murder, adultery,   coveting, wickedness, deceit, sensuality, envy, slander, pride, foolishness.   All these evil things come from within, and they defile a person.”

“Let the children be fed first, for it is not right to take the children's bread and throw it to the dogs.”  


“For this statement you may go your way; the demon has left your daughter.”  
“Ephphatha,”
“Be opened.”  
“I have compassion on the crowd, because they have been with me now three days and have nothing to eat.   And if I send them away hungry to their homes, they will faint on the way. And some of them have come from far away.”  
“How many loaves do you have?”
“Why does this generation seek a sign? Truly, I say to you, no sign will be given to this generation.”  
“Watch out; beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.”

“Why are you discussing the fact that you have no bread? Do you not yet perceive or understand? Are your hearts hardened?   Having eyes do you not see, and having ears do you not hear? And do you not remember?   When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up?”
“And the seven for the four thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up?”
“Do you not yet understand?”  

“Do you see anything?”  
“Do not even enter the village.”  
“Who do people say that I am?”  
“But who do you say that I am?”

“Get behind me, Satan! For you are not setting your mind on the things of God, but on the things of man.”

“If anyone would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.   For whoever would save his life  will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake and the gospel's will save it.   For what does it profit a man to gain the whole world and forfeit his soul?   For what can a man give in return for his soul?   For whoever is ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him will the Son of Man also be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.”

“Truly, I say to you, there are some standing here who will not taste death until they see the kingdom of God after it has come with power.”  
“Elijah does come first to restore all things. And how is it written of the Son of Man that he should suffer many things and be treated with contempt?   But I tell you that Elijah has come, and they did to him whatever they pleased, as it is written of him.”  
“What are you arguing about with them?”  
“O faithless generation, how long am I to be with you? How long am I to bear with you? Bring him to me.”  
“How long has this been happening to him?”
“‘If you can’! All things are possible for one who believes.”  
“You mute and deaf spirit, I command you, come out of him and never enter him again.”  
“This kind cannot be driven out by anything but prayer.”
“The Son of Man is going to be delivered into the hands of men, and they will kill him. And when he is killed, after three days he will rise.”  
“What were you discussing on the way?”  
“If anyone would be first, he must be last of all and servant of all.”  
“Whoever receives one such child in my name receives me, and whoever receives me, receives not me but him who sent me.”  
“Do not stop him, for no one who does a mighty work in my name will be able soon afterward to speak evil of me.   For the one who is not against us is for us.   For truly, I say to you, whoever gives you a cup of water to drink because you belong to Christ will by no means lose his reward.

“Whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin,  it would be better for him if a great millstone were hung around his neck and he were thrown into the sea.   And if your hand causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter life crippled than with two hands to go to hell,  to the unquenchable fire.    And if your foot causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter life lame than with two feet to be thrown into hell.   And if your eye causes you to sin, tear it out. It is better for you to enter the kingdom of God with one eye than with two eyes to be thrown into hell,   ‘where their worm does not die and the fire is not quenched.’   For everyone will be salted with fire.

“What did Moses command you?”  
“Because of your hardness of heart he wrote you this commandment.   But from the beginning of creation, ‘God made them male and female.’   ‘Therefore a man shall leave his father and mother and hold fast to his wife,    and the two shall become one flesh.’ So they are no longer two but one flesh.   What therefore God has joined together, let not man separate.”

“Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her,   and if she divorces her husband and marries another, she commits adultery.”  
“Let the children come to me; do not hinder them, for to such belongs the kingdom of God.   Truly, I say to you, whoever does not receive the kingdom of God like a child shall not enter it.”  
“Why do you call me good? No one is good except God alone.   You know the commandments: ‘Do not murder, Do not commit adultery, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Do not defraud, Honor your father and mother.’”  
“You lack one thing: go, sell all that you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me.”  
“How difficult it will be for those who have wealth to enter the kingdom of God!”

“Children, how difficult it is  to enter the kingdom of God!   It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.”

“With man it is impossible, but not with God. For all things are possible with God.”  
“Truly, I say to you, there is no one who has left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or lands, for my sake and for the gospel,   who will not receive a hundredfold now in this time, houses and brothers and sisters and mothers and children and lands, with persecutions, and in the age to come eternal life.   But many who are first will be last, and the last first.”  

“See, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered over to the chief priests and the scribes, and they will condemn him to death and deliver him over to the Gentiles.   And they will mock him and spit on him, and flog him and kill him. And after three days he will rise.”  
“What do you want me to do for you?”  
“You do not know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, or to be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized?”

“The cup that I drink you will drink, and with the baptism with which I am baptized, you will be baptized,   but to sit at my right hand or at my left is not mine to grant, but it is for those for whom it has been prepared.”  

“You know that those who are considered rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them.   But it shall not be so among you. But whoever would be great among you must be your servant,    and whoever would be first among you must be slave  of all.   For even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”


“Call him.”
 
“What do you want me to do for you?”
“Go your way; your faith has made you well.”
“Go into the village in front of you, and immediately as you enter it you will find a colt tied, on which no one has ever sat. Untie it and bring it.   If anyone says to you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ say, ‘The Lord has need of it and will send it back here immediately.’”  
“May no one ever eat fruit from you again.”
“Is it not written, ‘My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations’? But you have made it a den of robbers.”  
“Have faith in God.   Truly, I say to you, whoever says to this mountain, ‘Be taken up and thrown into the sea,’ and does not doubt in his heart, but believes that what he says will come to pass, it will be done for him.   Therefore I tell you, whatever you ask in prayer, believe that you have received  it, and it will be yours.   And whenever you stand praying, forgive, if you have anything against anyone, so that your Father also who is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses.”

“I will ask you one question; answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things.   Was the baptism of John from heaven or from man? Answer me.”  
“Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.”  

“A man planted a vineyard and put a fence around it and dug a pit for the winepress and built a tower, and leased it to tenants and went into another country.   When the season came, he sent a servant  to the tenants to get from them some of the fruit of the vineyard.   And they took him and beat him and sent him away empty-handed.   Again he sent to them another servant, and they struck him on the head and treated him shamefully.   And he sent another, and him they killed. And so with many others: some they beat, and some they killed.   He had still one other, a beloved son. Finally he sent him to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’   But those tenants said to one another, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’   And they took him and killed him and threw him out of the vineyard.   What will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy the tenants and give the vineyard to others.   Have you not read this Scripture: “‘The stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone;    this was the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?”

“Why put me to the test? Bring me a denarius  and let me look at it.”

“Whose likeness and inscription is this?”

“Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.”


“Is this not the reason you are wrong, because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God?   For when they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven.   And as for the dead being raised, have you not read in the book of Moses, in the passage about the bush, how God spoke to him, saying, ‘I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’?   He is not God of the dead, but of the living. You are quite wrong.”  
“The most important is, ‘Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God, the Lord is one.   And you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind and with all your strength.’   The second is this: ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no other commandment greater than these.”  
 It is like a man going on a journey, when he leaves home and puts his servants  in charge, each with his work, and commands the doorkeeper to stay awake.   Therefore stay awake—for you do not know when the master of the house will come, in the evening, or at midnight, or when the rooster crows,  or in the morning—  lest he come suddenly and find you asleep.   And what I say to you I say to all: Stay awake.”

“Do you see these great buildings? There will not be left here one stone upon another that will not be thrown down.”  
“See that no one leads you astray.   Many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he!’ and they will lead many astray.   And when you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be alarmed. This must take place, but the end is not yet.   For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes in various places; there will be famines. These are but the beginning of the birth pains.   “But be on your guard. For they will deliver you over to councils, and you will be beaten in synagogues, and you will stand before governors and kings for my sake, to bear witness before them.   And the gospel must first be proclaimed to all nations.   And when they bring you to trial and deliver you over, do not be anxious beforehand what you are to say, but say whatever is given you in that hour, for it is not you who speak, but the Holy Spirit.   And brother will deliver brother over to death, and the father his child, and children will rise against parents and have them put to death.   And you will be hated by all for my name's sake. But the one who endures to the end will be saved. The Abomination of Desolation   “But when you see the abomination of desolation standing where he ought not to be (let the reader understand), then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains.   Let the one who is on the housetop not go down, nor enter his house, to take anything out,   and let the one who is in the field not turn back to take his cloak.   And alas for women who are pregnant and for those who are nursing infants in those days!   Pray that it may not happen in winter.   For in those days there will be such tribulation as has not been from the beginning of the creation that God created until now, and never will be.   And if the Lord had not cut short the days, no human being would be saved. But for the sake of the elect, whom he chose, he shortened the days.   And then if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Christ!’ or ‘Look, there he is!’ do not believe it.   For false christs and false prophets will arise and perform signs and wonders, to lead astray, if possible, the elect.   But be on guard; I have told you all things beforehand. The Coming of the Son of Man   “But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light,   and the stars will be falling from heaven, and the powers in the heavens will be shaken.   And then they will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory.   And then he will send out the angels and gather his elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of heaven. The Lesson of the Fig Tree   “From the fig tree learn its lesson: as soon as its branch becomes tender and puts out its leaves, you know that summer is near.   So also, when you see these things taking place, you know that he is near, at the very gates.   Truly, I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all these things take place.   Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away. No One Knows That Day or Hour   “But concerning that day or that hour, no one knows, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.   Be on guard, keep awake.  For you do not know when the time will come.   It is like a man going on a journey, when he leaves home and puts his servants  in charge, each with his work, and commands the doorkeeper to stay awake.   Therefore stay awake—for you do not know when the master of the house will come, in the evening, or at midnight, or when the rooster crows,  or in the morning—  lest he come suddenly and find you asleep.   And what I say to you I say to all: Stay awake.”

“Leave her alone. Why do you trouble her? She has done a beautiful thing to me.   For you always have the poor with you, and whenever you want, you can do good for them. But you will not always have me.   She has done what she could; she has anointed my body beforehand for burial.   And truly, I say to you, wherever the gospel is proclaimed in the whole world, what she has done will be told in memory of her.”  


“Go into the city, and a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him,   and wherever he enters, say to the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says, Where is my guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?’   And he will show you a large upper room furnished and ready; there prepare for us.”  

“Truly, I say to you, one of you will betray me, one who is eating with me.”  
“It is one of the twelve, one who is dipping bread into the dish with me.   For the Son of Man goes as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would have been better for that man if he had not been born.”  

“Take; this is my body.”  
“This is my blood of the  covenant, which is poured out for many.   Truly, I say to you, I will not drink again of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God.”

“You will all fall away, for it is written, ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.’   But after I am raised up, I will go before you to Galilee.”  
“Truly, I tell you, this very night, before the rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times.”  
“Sit here while I pray.”  
“My soul is very sorrowful, even to death. Remain here and watch.”


“Abba, Father, all things are possible for you. Remove this cup from me. Yet not what I will, but what you will.”
“Simon, are you asleep? Could you not watch one hour?   Watch and pray that you may not enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.”  
“Are you still sleeping and taking your rest? It is enough; the hour has come. The Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.   Rise, let us be going; see, my betrayer is at hand.”  

“Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs to capture me?   Day after day I was with you in the temple teaching, and you did not seize me. But let the Scriptures be fulfilled.”  

“I am, and you will see the Son of Man seated at the right hand of Power, and coming with the clouds of heaven.”  

“Before the rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times.”
 

“You have said so.”  

“Eloi, Eloi, lema sabachthani?”

“My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”  

“Go into all the world and proclaim the gospel to the whole creation.   Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved, but whoever does not believe will be condemned.   And these signs will accompany those who believe: in my name they will cast out demons; they will speak in new tongues;   they will pick up serpents with their hands; and if they drink any deadly poison, it will not hurt them; they will lay their hands on the sick, and they will recover.”  
“It is written, ‘Man shall not live by bread alone.’”  
“It is written, “‘You shall worship the Lord your God, and him only shall you serve.’”  
“It is said, ‘You shall not put the Lord your God to the test.’”  
“The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty those who are oppressed,   to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor.”  
“Today this Scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing.”  
“Doubtless you will quote to me this proverb, ‘“Physician, heal yourself.”

“Truly, I say to you, no prophet is acceptable in his hometown.   But in truth, I tell you, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heavens were shut up three years and six months, and a great famine came over all the land,   and Elijah was sent to none of them but only to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow.   And there were many lepers  in Israel in the time of the prophet Elisha, and none of them was cleansed, but only Naaman the Syrian.”

“Be silent and come out of him!”

“I must preach the good news of the kingdom of God to the other towns as well; for I was sent for this purpose.”  

“Put out into the deep and let down your nets for a catch.”  

“Do not be afraid; from now on you will be catching men.” 

“I will; be clean.” 

“go and show yourself to the priest, and make an offering for your cleansing, as Moses commanded, for a proof to them.”

“Man, your sins are forgiven you.”  

“Why do you question in your hearts?   Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven you,’ or to say, ‘Rise and walk’?   But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins”

“I say to you, rise, pick up your bed and go home.”  

“Follow me.”  

“Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick.   I have not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.”  

“Can you make wedding guests fast while the bridegroom is with them?   The days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they will fast in those days.”

“No one tears a piece from a new garment and puts it on an old garment. If he does, he will tear the new, and the piece from the new will not match the old.   And no one puts new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the new wine will burst the skins and it will be spilled, and the skins will be destroyed.   But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins.   And no one after drinking old wine desires new, for he says, ‘The old is good.’” 

“Have you not read what David did when he was hungry, he and those who were with him:   how he entered the house of God and took and ate the bread of the Presence, which is not lawful for any but the priests to eat, and also gave it to those with him?”

“The Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.”  
“Come and stand here.”
“I ask you, is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do harm, to save life or to destroy it?”
“Stretch out your hand.”


“Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.   “Blessed are you who are hungry now, for you shall be satisfied. “Blessed are you who weep now, for you shall laugh.   “Blessed are you when people hate you and when they exclude you and revile you and spurn your name as evil, on account of the Son of Man!   Rejoice in that day, and leap for joy, for behold, your reward is great in heaven; for so their fathers did to the prophets. Jesus Pronounces Woes   “But woe to you who are rich, for you have received your consolation.   “Woe to you who are full now, for you shall be hungry. “Woe to you who laugh now, for you shall mourn and weep.   “Woe to you, when all people speak well of you, for so their fathers did to the false prophets. Love Your Enemies   “But I say to you who hear, Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,   bless those who curse you, pray for those who abuse you.   To one who strikes you on the cheek, offer the other also, and from one who takes away your cloak do not withhold your tunic  either.   Give to everyone who begs from you, and from one who takes away your goods do not demand them back.   And as you wish that others would do to you, do so to them.   “If you love those who love you, what benefit is that to you? For even sinners love those who love them.   And if you do good to those who do good to you, what benefit is that to you? For even sinners do the same.   And if you lend to those from whom you expect to receive, what credit is that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, to get back the same amount.   But love your enemies, and do good, and lend, expecting nothing in return, and your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, for he is kind to the ungrateful and the evil.   Be merciful, even as your Father is merciful. Judging Others   “Judge not, and you will not be judged; condemn not, and you will not be condemned; forgive, and you will be forgiven;   give, and it will be given to you. Good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over, will be put into your lap. For with the measure you use it will be measured back to you.”

“Can a blind man lead a blind man? Will they not both fall into a pit?   A disciple is not above his teacher, but everyone when he is fully trained will be like his teacher.   Why do you see the speck that is in your brother's eye, but do not notice the log that is in your own eye?   How can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, let me take out the speck that is in your eye,’ when you yourself do not see the log that is in your own eye? You hypocrite, first take the log out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to take out the speck that is in your brother's eye. A Tree and Its Fruit   “For no good tree bears bad fruit, nor again does a bad tree bear good fruit,   for each tree is known by its own fruit. For figs are not gathered from thornbushes, nor are grapes picked from a bramble bush.   The good person out of the good treasure of his heart produces good, and the evil person out of his evil treasure produces evil, for out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks. Build Your House on the Rock   “Why do you call me ‘Lord, Lord,’ and not do what I tell you?   Everyone who comes to me and hears my words and does them, I will show you what he is like:   he is like a man building a house, who dug deep and laid the foundation on the rock. And when a flood arose, the stream broke against that house and could not shake it, because it had been well built.    But the one who hears and does not do them is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation. When the stream broke against it, immediately it fell, and the ruin of that house was great.” 

“I tell you, not even in Israel have I found such faith.”  
“Do not weep.”
“Young man, I say to you, arise.”  
“Go and tell John what you have seen and heard: the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, lepers  are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, the poor have good news preached to them.   And blessed is the one who is not offended by me.”

“What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?   What then did you go out to see? A man dressed in soft clothing? Behold, those who are dressed in splendid clothing and live in luxury are in kings' courts.   What then did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.   This is he of whom it is written, “‘Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you.’   I tell you, among those born of women none is greater than John. Yet the one who is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.”
“To what then shall I compare the people of this generation, and what are they like?   They are like children sitting in the marketplace and calling to one another, “‘We played the flute for you, and you did not dance; we sang a dirge, and you did not weep.’   For John the Baptist has come eating no bread and drinking no wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon.’   The Son of Man has come eating and drinking, and you say, ‘Look at him! A glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’   Yet wisdom is justified by all her children.”  

“Simon, I have something to say to you.”

“A certain moneylender had two debtors. One owed five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.   When they could not pay, he cancelled the debt of both. Now which of them will love him more?”
“You have judged rightly.”

“Do you see this woman? I entered your house; you gave me no water for my feet, but she has wet my feet with her tears and wiped them with her hair.   You gave me no kiss, but from the time I came in she has not ceased to kiss my feet.   You did not anoint my head with oil, but she has anointed my feet with ointment.   Therefore I tell you, her sins, which are many, are forgiven—for she loved much. But he who is forgiven little, loves little.”
“Your sins are forgiven.” 
“Your faith has saved you; go in peace.”  
“A sower went out to sow his seed. And as he sowed, some fell along the path and was trampled underfoot, and the birds of the air devoured it.   And some fell on the rock, and as it grew up, it withered away, because it had no moisture.   And some fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up with it and choked it.   And some fell into good soil and grew and yielded a hundredfold.”

“He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”  
“To you it has been given to know the secrets of the kingdom of God, but for others they are in parables, so that ‘seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not understand.’   Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.   The ones along the path are those who have heard; then the devil comes and takes away the word from their hearts, so that they may not believe and be saved.   And the ones on the rock are those who, when they hear the word, receive it with joy. But these have no root; they believe for a while, and in time of testing fall away.   And as for what fell among the thorns, they are those who hear, but as they go on their way they are choked by the cares and riches and pleasures of life, and their fruit does not mature.   As for that in the good soil, they are those who, hearing the word, hold it fast in an honest and good heart, and bear fruit with patience. A Lamp Under a Jar   “No one after lighting a lamp covers it with a jar or puts it under a bed, but puts it on a stand, so that those who enter may see the light.   For nothing is hidden that will not be made manifest, nor is anything secret that will not be known and come to light.   Take care then how you hear, for to the one who has, more will be given, and from the one who has not, even what he thinks that he has will be taken away.”  
“My mother and my brothers are those who hear the word of God and do it.”  
“Let us go across to the other side of the lake.”
“Where is your faith?”

“Who then is this, that he commands even winds and water, and they obey him?”  
“What is your name?” 
“Return to your home, and declare how much God has done for you.”

“Who was it that touched me?”
“Master, the crowds surround you and are pressing in on you!”

“Someone touched me, for I perceive that power has gone out from me.”

“Daughter, your faith has made you well; go in peace.”  

“Do not fear; only believe, and she will be well.”  

“Do not weep, for she is not dead but sleeping.”  

“Child, arise.”  

“Take nothing for your journey, no staff, nor bag, nor bread, nor money; and do not have two tunics.    And whatever house you enter, stay there, and from there depart.   And wherever they do not receive you, when you leave that town shake off the dust from your feet as a testimony against them.”
“You give them something to eat.”
“We have no more than five loaves and two fish—unless we are to go and buy food for all these people.”
“Have them sit down in groups of about fifty each.”  

“Who do the crowds say that I am?”  
“But who do you say that I am?”
“The Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and on the third day be raised.”

“If anyone would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross daily and follow me.   For whoever would save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will save it.   For what does it profit a man if he gains the whole world and loses or forfeits himself?   For whoever is ashamed of me and of my words, of him will the Son of Man be ashamed when he comes in his glory and the glory of the Father and of the holy angels.   But I tell you truly, there are some standing here who will not taste death until they see the kingdom of God.”  

“O faithless and twisted generation, how long am I to be with you and bear with you? Bring your son here.”  
“Let these words sink into your ears: The Son of Man is about to be delivered into the hands of men.”  

“Whoever receives this child in my name receives me, and whoever receives me receives him who sent me. For he who is least among you all is the one who is great.”  

“Do not stop him, for the one who is not against you is for you.”  

“You do not know what manner of spirit you are of; 56for the Son of Man came not to destroy people's lives but to save them”*  
“Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.”

“Follow me.”
“Lord, let me first go and bury my father.”

“Leave the dead to bury their own dead. But as for you, go and proclaim the kingdom of God.”
“I will follow you, Lord, but let me first say farewell to those at my home.”
“No one who puts his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the kingdom of God.”

“The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few. Therefore pray earnestly to the Lord of the harvest to send out laborers into his harvest.   Go your way; behold, I am sending you out as lambs in the midst of wolves.   Carry no moneybag, no knapsack, no sandals, and greet no one on the road.   Whatever house you enter, first say, ‘Peace be to this house!’   And if a son of peace is there, your peace will rest upon him. But if not, it will return to you.   And remain in the same house, eating and drinking what they provide, for the laborer deserves his wages. Do not go from house to house.   Whenever you enter a town and they receive you, eat what is set before you.   Heal the sick in it and say to them, ‘The kingdom of God has come near to you.’   But whenever you enter a town and they do not receive you, go into its streets and say,   ‘Even the dust of your town that clings to our feet we wipe off against you. Nevertheless know this, that the kingdom of God has come near.’   I tell you, it will be more bearable on that day for Sodom than for that town. Woe to Unrepentant Cities   “Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.   But it will be more bearable in the judgment for Tyre and Sidon than for you.   And you, Capernaum, will you be exalted to heaven? You shall be brought down to Hades.   “The one who hears you hears me, and the one who rejects you rejects me, and the one who rejects me rejects him who sent me.”  

“I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven.   Behold, I have given you authority to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall hurt you.   Nevertheless, do not rejoice in this, that the spirits are subject to you, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven.”

“I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you have hidden these things from the wise and understanding and revealed them to little children; yes, Father, for such was your gracious will.    All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one knows who the Son is except the Father, or who the Father is except the Son and anyone to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.”

“Blessed are the eyes that see what you see!   For I tell you that many prophets and kings desired to see what you see, and did not see it, and to hear what you hear, and did not hear it.”

“What is written in the Law? How do you read it?”  

“You have answered correctly; do this, and you will live.”  

“A man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and he fell among robbers, who stripped him and beat him and departed, leaving him half dead.   Now by chance a priest was going down that road, and when he saw him he passed by on the other side.   So likewise a Levite, when he came to the place and saw him, passed by on the other side.   But a Samaritan, as he journeyed, came to where he was, and when he saw him, he had compassion.   He went to him and bound up his wounds, pouring on oil and wine. Then he set him on his own animal and brought him to an inn and took care of him.   And the next day he took out two denarii  and gave them to the innkeeper, saying, ‘Take care of him, and whatever more you spend, I will repay you when I come back.’   Which of these three, do you think, proved to be a neighbor to the man who fell among the robbers?”

“You go, and do likewise.”


“Martha, Martha, you are anxious and troubled about many things,   but one thing is necessary.  Mary has chosen the good portion, which will not be taken away from her.”

“When you pray, say: “Father, hallowed be your name. Your kingdom come.   Give us each day our daily bread,    and forgive us our sins, for we ourselves forgive everyone who is indebted to us. And lead us not into temptation.”

“Which of you who has a friend will go to him at midnight and say to him, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves,   for a friend of mine has arrived on a journey, and I have nothing to set before him’;   and he will answer from within, ‘Do not bother me; the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed. I cannot get up and give you anything’?   I tell you, though he will not get up and give him anything because he is his friend, yet because of his impudence  he will rise and give him whatever he needs.   And I tell you, ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you.   For everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and to the one who knocks it will be opened.   What father among you, if his son asks for  a fish, will instead of a fish give him a serpent;   or if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion?   If you then, who are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will the heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him!”

“Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and a divided household falls.   And if Satan also is divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say that I cast out demons by Beelzebul.   And if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore they will be your judges.   But if it is by the finger of God that I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.   When a strong man, fully armed, guards his own palace, his goods are safe;   but when one stronger than he attacks him and overcomes him, he takes away his armor in which he trusted and divides his spoil.   Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters. Return of an Unclean Spirit   “When the unclean spirit has gone out of a person, it passes through waterless places seeking rest, and finding none it says, ‘I will return to my house from which I came.’   And when it comes, it finds the house swept and put in order.   Then it goes and brings seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they enter and dwell there. And the last state of that person is worse than the first.”  

“Blessed rather are those who hear the word of God and keep it!”

“This generation is an evil generation. It seeks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah.   For as Jonah became a sign to the people of Nineveh, so will the Son of Man be to this generation.   The queen of the South will rise up at the judgment with the men of this generation and condemn them, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, something greater than Solomon is here.   The men of Nineveh will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, something greater than Jonah is here. The Light in You   “No one after lighting a lamp puts it in a cellar or under a basket, but on a stand, so that those who enter may see the light.   Your eye is the lamp of your body. When your eye is healthy, your whole body is full of light, but when it is bad, your body is full of darkness.   Therefore be careful lest the light in you be darkness.   If then your whole body is full of light, having no part dark, it will be wholly bright, as when a lamp with its rays gives you light.”  

“Now you Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and of the dish, but inside you are full of greed and wickedness.   You fools! Did not he who made the outside make the inside also?   But give as alms those things that are within, and behold, everything is clean for you.   “But woe to you Pharisees! For you tithe mint and rue and every herb, and neglect justice and the love of God. These you ought to have done, without neglecting the others.   Woe to you Pharisees! For you love the best seat in the synagogues and greetings in the marketplaces.   Woe to you! For you are like unmarked graves, and people walk over them without knowing it.”  

“Woe to you lawyers also! For you load people with burdens hard to bear, and you yourselves do not touch the burdens with one of your fingers.   Woe to you! For you build the tombs of the prophets whom your fathers killed.   So you are witnesses and you consent to the deeds of your fathers, for they killed them, and you build their tombs.   Therefore also the Wisdom of God said, ‘I will send them prophets and apostles, some of whom they will kill and persecute,’   so that the blood of all the prophets, shed from the foundation of the world, may be charged against this generation,   from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, who perished between the altar and the sanctuary. Yes, I tell you, it will be required of this generation.   Woe to you lawyers! For you have taken away the key of knowledge. You did not enter yourselves, and you hindered those who were entering.”  

“Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.   Nothing is covered up that will not be revealed, or hidden that will not be known.   Therefore whatever you have said in the dark shall be heard in the light, and what you have whispered in private rooms shall be proclaimed on the housetops. Have No Fear   “I tell you, my friends, do not fear those who kill the body, and after that have nothing more that they can do.   But I will warn you whom to fear: fear him who, after he has killed, has authority to cast into hell.  Yes, I tell you, fear him!   Are not five sparrows sold for two pennies?  And not one of them is forgotten before God.   Why, even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not; you are of more value than many sparrows. Acknowledge Christ Before Men   “And I tell you, everyone who acknowledges me before men, the Son of Man also will acknowledge before the angels of God,   but the one who denies me before men will be denied before the angels of God.   And everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but the one who blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.   And when they bring you before the synagogues and the rulers and the authorities, do not be anxious about how you should defend yourself or what you should say,   for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that very hour what you ought to say.” Footnotes   

“Man, who made me a judge or arbitrator over you?” 

“Take care, and be on your guard against all covetousness, for one's life does not consist in the abundance of his possessions.” 

“The land of a rich man produced plentifully,   and he thought to himself, ‘What shall I do, for I have nowhere to store my crops?’   And he said, ‘I will do this: I will tear down my barns and build larger ones, and there I will store all my grain and my goods.   And I will say to my soul, “Soul, you have ample goods laid up for many years; relax, eat, drink, be merry.”’   But God said to him, ‘Fool! This night your soul is required of you, and the things you have prepared, whose will they be?’   So is the one who lays up treasure for himself and is not rich toward God.”
“Therefore I tell you, do not be anxious about your life, what you will eat, nor about your body, what you will put on.   For life is more than food, and the body more than clothing.   Consider the ravens: they neither sow nor reap, they have neither storehouse nor barn, and yet God feeds them. Of how much more value are you than the birds!   And which of you by being anxious can add a single hour to his span of life?    If then you are not able to do as small a thing as that, why are you anxious about the rest?   Consider the lilies, how they grow: they neither toil nor spin,  yet I tell you, even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.   But if God so clothes the grass, which is alive in the field today, and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, how much more will he clothe you, O you of little faith!   And do not seek what you are to eat and what you are to drink, nor be worried.   For all the nations of the world seek after these things, and your Father knows that you need them.   Instead, seek his  kingdom, and these things will be added to you.   “Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom.   Sell your possessions, and give to the needy. Provide yourselves with moneybags that do not grow old, with a treasure in the heavens that does not fail, where no thief approaches and no moth destroys.   For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. You Must Be Ready   “Stay dressed for action  and keep your lamps burning,   and be like men who are waiting for their master to come home from the wedding feast, so that they may open the door to him at once when he comes and knocks.   Blessed are those servants  whom the master finds awake when he comes. Truly, I say to you, he will dress himself for service and have them recline at table, and he will come and serve them.   If he comes in the second watch, or in the third, and finds them awake, blessed are those servants!   But know this, that if the master of the house had known at what hour the thief was coming, he  would not have left his house to be broken into.   You also must be ready, for the Son of Man is coming at an hour you do not expect.” 

“Lord, are you telling this parable for us or for all?” 

“Who then is the faithful and wise manager, whom his master will set over his household, to give them their portion of food at the proper time?   Blessed is that servant  whom his master will find so doing when he comes.   Truly, I say to you, he will set him over all his possessions.   But if that servant says to himself, ‘My master is delayed in coming,’ and begins to beat the male and female servants, and to eat and drink and get drunk,   the master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he does not know, and will cut him in pieces and put him with the unfaithful.   And that servant who knew his master's will but did not get ready or act according to his will, will receive a severe beating.   But the one who did not know, and did what deserved a beating, will receive a light beating. Everyone to whom much was given, of him much will be required, and from him to whom they entrusted much, they will demand the more. Not Peace, but Division   “I came to cast fire on the earth, and would that it were already kindled!   I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how great is my distress until it is accomplished!   Do you think that I have come to give peace on earth? No, I tell you, but rather division.   For from now on in one house there will be five divided, three against two and two against three.   They will be divided, father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law.”
“When you see a cloud rising in the west, you say at once, ‘A shower is coming.’ And so it happens.   And when you see the south wind blowing, you say, ‘There will be scorching heat,’ and it happens.   You hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of earth and sky, but why do you not know how to interpret the present time? Settle with Your Accuser   “And why do you not judge for yourselves what is right?   As you go with your accuser before the magistrate, make an effort to settle with him on the way, lest he drag you to the judge, and the judge hand you over to the officer, and the officer put you in prison.   I tell you, you will never get out until you have paid the very last penny.” 
“Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans, because they suffered in this way?   No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise perish.   Or those eighteen on whom the tower in Siloam fell and killed them: do you think that they were worse offenders than all the others who lived in Jerusalem?   No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise perish.”

“A man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit on it and found none.   And he said to the vinedresser, ‘Look, for three years now I have come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and I find none. Cut it down. Why should it use up the ground?’   And he answered him, ‘Sir, let it alone this year also, until I dig around it and put on manure.   Then if it should bear fruit next year, well and good; but if not, you can cut it down.’”  
“Woman, you are freed from your disability.”  

“You hypocrites! Does not each of you on the Sabbath untie his ox or his donkey from the manger and lead it away to water it?   And ought not this woman, a daughter of Abraham whom Satan bound for eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath day?”  

“What is the kingdom of God like? And to what shall I compare it?   It is like a grain of mustard seed that a man took and sowed in his garden, and it grew and became a tree, and the birds of the air made nests in its branches.”

“To what shall I compare the kingdom of God?   It is like leaven that a woman took and hid in three measures of flour, until it was all leavened.”  
“Strive to enter through the narrow door. For many, I tell you, will seek to enter and will not be able.   When once the master of the house has risen and shut the door, and you begin to stand outside and to knock at the door, saying, ‘Lord, open to us,’ then he will answer you, ‘I do not know where you come from.’   Then you will begin to say, ‘We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our streets.’   But he will say, ‘I tell you, I do not know where you come from. Depart from me, all you workers of evil!’   In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God but you yourselves cast out.   And people will come from east and west, and from north and south, and recline at table in the kingdom of God.   And behold, some are last who will be first, and some are first who will be last.”  
“Go and tell that fox, ‘Behold, I cast out demons and perform cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I finish my course.   Nevertheless, I must go on my way today and tomorrow and the day following, for it cannot be that a prophet should perish away from Jerusalem.’   O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to it! How often would I have gathered your children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and you were not willing!   Behold, your house is forsaken. And I tell you, you will not see me until you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!’”  
“Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath, or not?”  
“Which of you, having a son  or an ox that has fallen into a well on a Sabbath day, will not immediately pull him out?”
“When you are invited by someone to a wedding feast, do not sit down in a place of honor, lest someone more distinguished than you be invited by him,   and he who invited you both will come and say to you, ‘Give your place to this person,’ and then you will begin with shame to take the lowest place.   But when you are invited, go and sit in the lowest place, so that when your host comes he may say to you, ‘Friend, move up higher.’ Then you will be honored in the presence of all who sit at table with you.   For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and he who humbles himself will be exalted.”

“When you give a dinner or a banquet, do not invite your friends or your brothers  or your relatives or rich neighbors, lest they also invite you in return and you be repaid.   But when you give a feast, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind,   and you will be blessed, because they cannot repay you. For you will be repaid at the resurrection of the just.”

“A man once gave a great banquet and invited many.   And at the time for the banquet he sent his servant  to say to those who had been invited, ‘Come, for everything is now ready.’   But they all alike began to make excuses. The first said to him, ‘I have bought a field, and I must go out and see it. Please have me excused.’   And another said, ‘I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to examine them. Please have me excused.’   And another said, ‘I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.’   So the servant came and reported these things to his master. Then the master of the house became angry and said to his servant, ‘Go out quickly to the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in the poor and crippled and blind and lame.’   And the servant said, ‘Sir, what you commanded has been done, and still there is room.’   And the master said to the servant, ‘Go out to the highways and hedges and compel people to come in, that my house may be filled.   For I tell you,  none of those men who were invited shall taste my banquet.’”

“If anyone comes to me and does not hate his own father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple.   Whoever does not bear his own cross and come after me cannot be my disciple.   For which of you, desiring to build a tower, does not first sit down and count the cost, whether he has enough to complete it?   Otherwise, when he has laid a foundation and is not able to finish, all who see it begin to mock him,   saying, ‘This man began to build and was not able to finish.’   Or what king, going out to encounter another king in war, will not sit down first and deliberate whether he is able with ten thousand to meet him who comes against him with twenty thousand?   And if not, while the other is yet a great way off, he sends a delegation and asks for terms of peace.   So therefore, any one of you who does not renounce all that he has cannot be my disciple. Salt Without Taste Is Worthless   “Salt is good, but if salt has lost its taste, how shall its saltiness be restored?   It is of no use either for the soil or for the manure pile. It is thrown away. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”  
“What man of you, having a hundred sheep, if he has lost one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine in the open country, and go after the one that is lost, until he finds it?   And when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing.   And when he comes home, he calls together his friends and his neighbors, saying to them, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep that was lost.’   Just so, I tell you, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous persons who need no repentance. The Parable of the Lost Coin   “Or what woman, having ten silver coins,  if she loses one coin, does not light a lamp and sweep the house and seek diligently until she finds it?   And when she has found it, she calls together her friends and neighbors, saying, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found the coin that I had lost.’   Just so, I tell you, there is joy before the angels of God over one sinner who repents.”

“There was a man who had two sons.   And the younger of them said to his father, ‘Father, give me the share of property that is coming to me.’ And he divided his property between them.   Not many days later, the younger son gathered all he had and took a journey into a far country, and there he squandered his property in reckless living.   And when he had spent everything, a severe famine arose in that country, and he began to be in need.   So he went and hired himself out to  one of the citizens of that country, who sent him into his fields to feed pigs.   And he was longing to be fed with the pods that the pigs ate, and no one gave him anything.   “But when he came to himself, he said, ‘How many of my father's hired servants have more than enough bread, but I perish here with hunger!   I will arise and go to my father, and I will say to him, “Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you.   I am no longer worthy to be called your son. Treat me as one of your hired servants.”’   And he arose and came to his father. But while he was still a long way off, his father saw him and felt compassion, and ran and embraced him and kissed him.   And the son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son.’    But the father said to his servants,  ‘Bring quickly the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet.   And bring the fattened calf and kill it, and let us eat and celebrate.   For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found.’ And they began to celebrate.   “Now his older son was in the field, and as he came and drew near to the house, he heard music and dancing.   And he called one of the servants and asked what these things meant.   And he said to him, ‘Your brother has come, and your father has killed the fattened calf, because he has received him back safe and sound.’   But he was angry and refused to go in. His father came out and entreated him,   but he answered his father, ‘Look, these many years I have served you, and I never disobeyed your command, yet you never gave me a young goat, that I might celebrate with my friends.   But when this son of yours came, who has devoured your property with prostitutes, you killed the fattened calf for him!’   And he said to him, ‘Son, you are always with me, and all that is mine is yours.   It was fitting to celebrate and be glad, for this your brother was dead, and is alive; he was lost, and is found.’” 

“There was a rich man who had a manager, and charges were brought to him that this man was wasting his possessions.   And he called him and said to him, ‘What is this that I hear about you? Turn in the account of your management, for you can no longer be manager.’   And the manager said to himself, ‘What shall I do, since my master is taking the management away from me? I am not strong enough to dig, and I am ashamed to beg.   I have decided what to do, so that when I am removed from management, people may receive me into their houses.’   So, summoning his master's debtors one by one, he said to the first, ‘How much do you owe my master?’   He said, ‘A hundred measures  of oil.’ He said to him, ‘Take your bill, and sit down quickly and write fifty.’   Then he said to another, ‘And how much do you owe?’ He said, ‘A hundred measures  of wheat.’ He said to him, ‘Take your bill, and write eighty.’   The master commended the dishonest manager for his shrewdness. For the sons of this world  are more shrewd in dealing with their own generation than the sons of light.   And I tell you, make friends for yourselves by means of unrighteous wealth,  so that when it fails they may receive you into the eternal dwellings.   “One who is faithful in a very little is also faithful in much, and one who is dishonest in a very little is also dishonest in much.   If then you have not been faithful in the unrighteous wealth, who will entrust to you the true riches?   And if you have not been faithful in that which is another's, who will give you that which is your own?   No servant can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and money.”

“You are those who justify yourselves before men, but God knows your hearts. For what is exalted among men is an abomination in the sight of God.   “The Law and the Prophets were until John; since then the good news of the kingdom of God is preached, and everyone forces his way into it.    But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one dot of the Law to become void. Divorce and Remarriage   “Everyone who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery, and he who marries a woman divorced from her husband commits adultery. The Rich Man and Lazarus   “There was a rich man who was clothed in purple and fine linen and who feasted sumptuously every day.   And at his gate was laid a poor man named Lazarus, covered with sores,   who desired to be fed with what fell from the rich man's table. Moreover, even the dogs came and licked his sores.   The poor man died and was carried by the angels to Abraham's side.  The rich man also died and was buried,   and in Hades, being in torment, he lifted up his eyes and saw Abraham far off and Lazarus at his side.   And he called out, ‘Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus to dip the end of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am in anguish in this flame.’   But Abraham said, ‘Child, remember that you in your lifetime received your good things, and Lazarus in like manner bad things; but now he is comforted here, and you are in anguish.   And besides all this, between us and you a great chasm has been fixed, in order that those who would pass from here to you may not be able, and none may cross from there to us.’   And he said, ‘Then I beg you, father, to send him to my father's house—  for I have five brothers—so that he may warn them, lest they also come into this place of torment.’   But Abraham said, ‘They have Moses and the Prophets; let them hear them.’   And he said, ‘No, father Abraham, but if someone goes to them from the dead, they will repent.’   He said to him, ‘If they do not hear Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be convinced if someone should rise from the dead.’”

“Temptations to sin  are sure to come, but woe to the one through whom they come!   It would be better for him if a millstone were hung around his neck and he were cast into the sea than that he should cause one of these little ones to sin.    Pay attention to yourselves! If your brother sins, rebuke him, and if he repents, forgive him,   and if he sins against you seven times in the day, and turns to you seven times, saying, ‘I repent,’ you must forgive him.”

 “If you had faith like a grain of mustard seed, you could say to this mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea,’ and it would obey you. Unworthy Servants   “Will any one of you who has a servant  plowing or keeping sheep say to him when he has come in from the field, ‘Come at once and recline at table’?   Will he not rather say to him, ‘Prepare supper for me, and dress properly,  and serve me while I eat and drink, and afterward you will eat and drink’?   Does he thank the servant because he did what was commanded?   So you also, when you have done all that you were commanded, say, ‘We are unworthy servants;  we have only done what was our duty.’”
 
 “Go and show yourselves to the priests.” 
 

“Were not ten cleansed? Where are the nine?   Was no one found to return and give praise to God except this foreigner?”
“Rise and go your way; your faith has made you well.”

“The kingdom of God is not coming in ways that can be observed,   nor will they say, ‘Look, here it is!’ or ‘There!’ for behold, the kingdom of God is in the midst of you.”
“The days are coming when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and you will not see it.   And they will say to you, ‘Look, there!’ or ‘Look, here!’ Do not go out or follow them.   For as the lightning flashes and lights up the sky from one side to the other, so will the Son of Man be in his day.    But first he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.   Just as it was in the days of Noah, so will it be in the days of the Son of Man.   They were eating and drinking and marrying and being given in marriage, until the day when Noah entered the ark, and the flood came and destroyed them all.   Likewise, just as it was in the days of Lot—they were eating and drinking, buying and selling, planting and building,   but on the day when Lot went out from Sodom, fire and sulfur rained from heaven and destroyed them all—  so will it be on the day when the Son of Man is revealed.   On that day, let the one who is on the housetop, with his goods in the house, not come down to take them away, and likewise let the one who is in the field not turn back.   Remember Lot's wife.   Whoever seeks to preserve his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life will keep it.   I tell you, in that night there will be two in one bed. One will be taken and the other left.   There will be two women grinding together. One will be taken and the other left.”    And 

“Where the corpse  is, there the vultures  will gather.”

“In a certain city there was a judge who neither feared God nor respected man.   And there was a widow in that city who kept coming to him and saying, ‘Give me justice against my adversary.’   For a while he refused, but afterward he said to himself, ‘Though I neither fear God nor respect man,   yet because this widow keeps bothering me, I will give her justice, so that she will not beat me down by her continual coming.’”

“Hear what the unrighteous judge says.   And will not God give justice to his elect, who cry to him day and night? Will he delay long over them?   I tell you, he will give justice to them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on earth?”  
“Two men went up into the temple to pray, one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector.   The Pharisee, standing by himself, prayed  thus: ‘God, I thank you that I am not like other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even like this tax collector.   I fast twice a week; I give tithes of all that I get.’   But the tax collector, standing far off, would not even lift up his eyes to heaven, but beat his breast, saying, ‘God, be merciful to me, a sinner!’   I tell you, this man went down to his house justified, rather than the other. For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but the one who humbles himself will be exalted.”
“Let the children come to me, and do not hinder them, for to such belongs the kingdom of God.   Truly, I say to you, whoever does not receive the kingdom of God like a child shall not enter it.”  
“Why do you call me good? No one is good except God alone.   You know the commandments: ‘Do not commit adultery, Do not murder, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Honor your father and mother.’”  

“One thing you still lack. Sell all that you have and distribute to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me.”  
“How difficult it is for those who have wealth to enter the kingdom of God!   For it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.”  
“What is impossible with man is possible with God.”  
“Truly, I say to you, there is no one who has left house or wife or brothers  or parents or children, for the sake of the kingdom of God,   who will not receive many times more in this time, and in the age to come eternal life.”

“See, we are going up to Jerusalem, and everything that is written about the Son of Man by the prophets will be accomplished.   For he will be delivered over to the Gentiles and will be mocked and shamefully treated and spit upon.   And after flogging him, they will kill him, and on the third day he will rise.”
“What do you want me to do for you?”

“Recover your sight; your faith has made you well.”  
“Zacchaeus, hurry and come down, for I must stay at your house today.”  

“Today salvation has come to this house, since he also is a son of Abraham.   For the Son of Man came to seek and to save the lost.”  

“A nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom and then return.   Calling ten of his servants,  he gave them ten minas,  and said to them, ‘Engage in business until I come.’   But his citizens hated him and sent a delegation after him, saying, ‘We do not want this man to reign over us.’   When he returned, having received the kingdom, he ordered these servants to whom he had given the money to be called to him, that he might know what they had gained by doing business.   The first came before him, saying, ‘Lord, your mina has made ten minas more.’   And he said to him, ‘Well done, good servant!  Because you have been faithful in a very little, you shall have authority over ten cities.’   And the second came, saying, ‘Lord, your mina has made five minas.’   And he said to him, ‘And you are to be over five cities.’   Then another came, saying, ‘Lord, here is your mina, which I kept laid away in a handkerchief;   for I was afraid of you, because you are a severe man. You take what you did not deposit, and reap what you did not sow.’   He said to him, ‘I will condemn you with your own words, you wicked servant! You knew that I was a severe man, taking what I did not deposit and reaping what I did not sow?   Why then did you not put my money in the bank, and at my coming I might have collected it with interest?’   And he said to those who stood by, ‘Take the mina from him, and give it to the one who has the ten minas.’   And they said to him, ‘Lord, he has ten minas!’   ‘I tell you that to everyone who has, more will be given, but from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away.   But as for these enemies of mine, who did not want me to reign over them, bring them here and slaughter them before me.’”

“Go into the village in front of you, where on entering you will find a colt tied, on which no one has ever yet sat. Untie it and bring it here.   If anyone asks you, ‘Why are you untying it?’ you shall say this: ‘The Lord has need of it.’”  

“I tell you, if these were silent, the very stones would cry out.”  

“Would that you, even you, had known on this day the things that make for peace! But now they are hidden from your eyes.   For the days will come upon you, when your enemies will set up a barricade around you and surround you and hem you in on every side   and tear you down to the ground, you and your children within you. And they will not leave one stone upon another in you, because you did not know the time of your visitation.”  

“It is written, ‘My house shall be a house of prayer,’ but you have made it a den of robbers.”  

“I also will ask you a question. Now tell me,   was the baptism of John from heaven or from man?”  

“Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.”

“A man planted a vineyard and let it out to tenants and went into another country for a long while.   When the time came, he sent a servant  to the tenants, so that they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. But the tenants beat him and sent him away empty-handed.   And he sent another servant. But they also beat and treated him shamefully, and sent him away empty-handed.   And he sent yet a third. This one also they wounded and cast out.   Then the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What shall I do? I will send my beloved son; perhaps they will respect him.’   But when the tenants saw him, they said to themselves, ‘This is the heir. Let us kill him, so that the inheritance may be ours.’   And they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. What then will the owner of the vineyard do to them?   He will come and destroy those tenants and give the vineyard to others.” When they heard this, they said, “Surely not!”   But he looked directly at them and said, “What then is this that is written: “‘The stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone’?    Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, and when it falls on anyone, it will crush him.” Footnotes     Or *bondservant*; also verse 11     Greek *the head of the corner*  


“Tell us by what authority you do these things, or who it is that gave you this authority.”

“I also will ask you a question. Now tell me,   was the baptism of John from heaven or from man?”

“If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why did you not believe him?’   But if we say, ‘From man,’ all the people will stone us to death, for they are convinced that John was a prophet.”
“Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.”

“A man planted a vineyard and let it out to tenants and went into another country for a long while.   When the time came, he sent a servant  to the tenants, so that they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. But the tenants beat him and sent him away empty-handed.   And he sent another servant. But they also beat and treated him shamefully, and sent him away empty-handed.   And he sent yet a third. This one also they wounded and cast out.   Then the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What shall I do? I will send my beloved son; perhaps they will respect him.’   But when the tenants saw him, they said to themselves, ‘This is the heir. Let us kill him, so that the inheritance may be ours.’   And they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. What then will the owner of the vineyard do to them?   He will come and destroy those tenants and give the vineyard to others.”

“What then is this that is written: “‘The stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone’?    Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, and when it falls on anyone, it will crush him.”

“Teacher, we know that you speak and teach rightly, and show no partiality,  but truly teach the way of God.   Is it lawful for us to give tribute to Caesar, or not?”
“Show me a denarius.  Whose likeness and inscription does it have?”

“Then render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.”

“Teacher, Moses wrote for us that if a man's brother dies, having a wife but no children, the man  must take the widow and raise up offspring for his brother.   Now there were seven brothers. The first took a wife, and died without children.   And the second   and the third took her, and likewise all seven left no children and died.   Afterward the woman also died.   In the resurrection, therefore, whose wife will the woman be? For the seven had her as wife.”

“The sons of this age marry and are given in marriage,   but those who are considered worthy to attain to that age and to the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage,   for they cannot die anymore, because they are equal to angels and are sons of God, being sons  of the resurrection.   But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed, in the passage about the bush, where he calls the Lord the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob.   Now he is not God of the dead, but of the living, for all live to him.”   
“Teacher, you have spoken well.”

“How can they say that the Christ is David's son?   For David himself says in the Book of Psalms, “‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at my right hand,   until I make your enemies your footstool.”

“Beware of the scribes, who like to walk around in long robes, and love greetings in the marketplaces and the best seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at feasts,   who devour widows' houses and for a pretense make long prayers. They will receive the greater condemnation.”

“Truly, I tell you, this poor widow has put in more than all of them.   For they all contributed out of their abundance, but she out of her poverty put in all she had to live on.”

“As for these things that you see, the days will come when there will not be left here one stone upon another that will not be thrown down.”  
“Teacher, when will these things be, and what will be the sign when these things are about to take place?”

“See that you are not led astray. For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he!’ and, ‘The time is at hand!’ Do not go after them.   And when you hear of wars and tumults, do not be terrified, for these things must first take place, but the end will not be at once.”

“Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.   There will be great earthquakes, and in various places famines and pestilences. And there will be terrors and great signs from heaven.   But before all this they will lay their hands on you and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues and prisons, and you will be brought before kings and governors for my name's sake.   This will be your opportunity to bear witness.   Settle it therefore in your minds not to meditate beforehand how to answer,   for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which none of your adversaries will be able to withstand or contradict.   You will be delivered up even by parents and brothers  and relatives and friends, and some of you they will put to death.   You will be hated by all for my name's sake.   But not a hair of your head will perish.   By your endurance you will gain your lives. Jesus Foretells Destruction of Jerusalem   “But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know that its desolation has come near.   Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains, and let those who are inside the city depart, and let not those who are out in the country enter it,   for these are days of vengeance, to fulfill all that is written.   Alas for women who are pregnant and for those who are nursing infants in those days! For there will be great distress upon the earth and wrath against this people.   They will fall by the edge of the sword and be led captive among all nations, and Jerusalem will be trampled underfoot by the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. The Coming of the Son of Man   “And there will be signs in sun and moon and stars, and on the earth distress of nations in perplexity because of the roaring of the sea and the waves,   people fainting with fear and with foreboding of what is coming on the world. For the powers of the heavens will be shaken.   And then they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.   Now when these things begin to take place, straighten up and raise your heads, because your redemption is drawing near.”

“Look at the fig tree, and all the trees.   As soon as they come out in leaf, you see for yourselves and know that the summer is already near.   So also, when you see these things taking place, you know that the kingdom of God is near.   Truly, I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all has taken place.   Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away. Watch Yourselves   “But watch yourselves lest your hearts be weighed down with dissipation and drunkenness and cares of this life, and that day come upon you suddenly like a trap.   For it will come upon all who dwell on the face of the whole earth.   But stay awake at all times, praying that you may have strength to escape all these things that are going to take place, and to stand before the Son of Man.”   And every day he was teaching in the temple, but at night he went out and lodged on the mount called Olivet.   And early in the morning all the people came to him in the temple to hear him. The Plot to Kill Jesus   Now the Feast of Unleavened Bread drew near, which is called the Passover.   And the chief priests and the scribes were seeking how to put him to death, for they feared the people. Judas to Betray Jesus   Then Satan entered into Judas called Iscariot, who was of the number of the twelve.   He went away and conferred with the chief priests and officers how he might betray him to them.   And they were glad, and agreed to give him money.   So he consented and sought an opportunity to betray him to them in the absence of a crowd. The Passover with the Disciples   Then came the day of Unleavened Bread, on which the Passover lamb had to be sacrificed.   So Jesus  sent Peter and John, saying, “Go and prepare the Passover for us, that we may eat it.”   They said to him, “Where will you have us prepare it?”   He said to them, “Behold, when you have entered the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him into the house that he enters   and tell the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says to you, Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?’   And he will show you a large upper room furnished; prepare it there.”   And they went and found it just as he had told them, and they prepared the Passover. Institution of the Lord's Supper   And when the hour came, he reclined at table, and the apostles with him.   And he said to them, “I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer.   For I tell you I will not eat it  until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.”   And he took a cup, and when he had given thanks he said, “Take this, and divide it among yourselves.   For I tell you that from now on I will not drink of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.”   And he took bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it and gave it to them, saying, “This is my body, which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of me.”   And likewise the cup after they had eaten, saying, “This cup that is poured out for you is the new covenant in my blood.    But behold, the hand of him who betrays me is with me on the table.   For the Son of Man goes as it has been determined, but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed!”   And they began to question one another, which of them it could be who was going to do this. Who Is the Greatest?   A dispute also arose among them, as to which of them was to be regarded as the greatest.   And he said to them, “The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and those in authority over them are called benefactors.   But not so with you. Rather, let the greatest among you become as the youngest, and the leader as one who serves.   For who is the greater, one who reclines at table or one who serves? Is it not the one who reclines at table? But I am among you as the one who serves.   “You are those who have stayed with me in my trials,   and I assign to you, as my Father assigned to me, a kingdom,   that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Jesus Foretells Peter's Denial   “Simon, Simon, behold, Satan demanded to have you,  that he might sift you like wheat,   but I have prayed for you that your faith may not fail. And when you have turned again, strengthen your brothers.”

“I tell you, Peter, the rooster will not crow this day, until you deny three times that you know me.” Scripture Must Be Fulfilled in Jesus   And he said to them, “When I sent you out with no moneybag or knapsack or sandals, did you lack anything?”

“But now let the one who has a moneybag take it, and likewise a knapsack. And let the one who has no sword sell his cloak and buy one.   For I tell you that this Scripture must be fulfilled in me: ‘And he was numbered with the transgressors.’ For what is written about me has its fulfillment.”

“It is enough.”

“Pray that you may not enter into temptation.”

“Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, not my will, but yours, be done.”

“Why are you sleeping? Rise and pray that you may not enter into temptation.”

“Judas, would you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?”

“No more of this!”

“Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs?   When I was with you day after day in the temple, you did not lay hands on me. But this is your hour, and the power of darkness.”

“Before the rooster crows today, you will deny me three times.”

“If I tell you, you will not believe,   and if I ask you, you will not answer.   But from now on the Son of Man shall be seated at the right hand of the power of God.” 

“You say that I am.”

“You have said so.”

“Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children.   For behold, the days are coming when they will say, ‘Blessed are the barren and the wombs that never bore and the breasts that never nursed!’   Then they will begin to say to the mountains, ‘Fall on us,’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us.’   For if they do these things when the wood is green, what will happen when it is dry?”

“Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.”

“Truly, I say to you, today you will be with me in paradise.”

“Father, into your hands I commit my spirit!”

“Why do you seek the living among the dead?   He is not here, but has risen. Remember how he told you, while he was still in Galilee,   that the Son of Man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men and be crucified and on the third day rise.”

“What is this conversation that you are holding with each other as you walk?”

“What things?”

“O foolish ones, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken!   Was it not necessary that the Christ should suffer these things and enter into his glory?”

“Peace to you!”

“Why are you troubled, and why do doubts arise in your hearts?   See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself. Touch me, and see. For a spirit does not have flesh and bones as you see that I have.”

“These are my words that I spoke to you while I was still with you, that everything written about me in the Law of Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms must be fulfilled.”

“Thus it is written, that the Christ should suffer and on the third day rise from the dead,   and that repentance for  the forgiveness of sins should be proclaimed in his name to all nations, beginning from Jerusalem.   You are witnesses of these things.   And behold, I am sending the promise of my Father upon you. But stay in the city until you are clothed with power from on high.”


“The sons of this age marry and are given in marriage,   but those who are considered worthy to attain to that age and to the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage,   for they cannot die anymore, because they are equal to angels and are sons of God, being sons  of the resurrection.   But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed, in the passage about the bush, where he calls the Lord the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob.   Now he is not God of the dead, but of the living, for all live to him.”

“How can they say that the Christ is David's son?   For David himself says in the Book of Psalms, “‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at my right hand,   until I make your enemies your footstool.”

“Beware of the scribes, who like to walk around in long robes, and love greetings in the marketplaces and the best seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at feasts,   who devour widows' houses and for a pretense make long prayers. They will receive the greater condemnation.”  
“Truly, I tell you, this poor widow has put in more than all of them.   For they all contributed out of their abundance, but she out of her poverty put in all she had to live on.”  
“As for these things that you see, the days will come when there will not be left here one stone upon another that will not be thrown down.”  
“See that you are not led astray. For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he!’ and, ‘The time is at hand!’ Do not go after them.   And when you hear of wars and tumults, do not be terrified, for these things must first take place, but the end will not be at once.”

“Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.   There will be great earthquakes, and in various places famines and pestilences. And there will be terrors and great signs from heaven.   But before all this they will lay their hands on you and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues and prisons, and you will be brought before kings and governors for my name's sake.   This will be your opportunity to bear witness.   Settle it therefore in your minds not to meditate beforehand how to answer,   for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which none of your adversaries will be able to withstand or contradict.   You will be delivered up even by parents and brothers  and relatives and friends, and some of you they will put to death.   You will be hated by all for my name's sake.   But not a hair of your head will perish.   By your endurance you will gain your lives. Jesus Foretells Destruction of Jerusalem   “But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know that its desolation has come near.   Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains, and let those who are inside the city depart, and let not those who are out in the country enter it,   for these are days of vengeance, to fulfill all that is written.   Alas for women who are pregnant and for those who are nursing infants in those days! For there will be great distress upon the earth and wrath against this people.   They will fall by the edge of the sword and be led captive among all nations, and Jerusalem will be trampled underfoot by the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. The Coming of the Son of Man   “And there will be signs in sun and moon and stars, and on the earth distress of nations in perplexity because of the roaring of the sea and the waves,   people fainting with fear and with foreboding of what is coming on the world. For the powers of the heavens will be shaken.   And then they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.   Now when these things begin to take place, straighten up and raise your heads, because your redemption is drawing near.”

“Look at the fig tree, and all the trees.   As soon as they come out in leaf, you see for yourselves and know that the summer is already near.   So also, when you see these things taking place, you know that the kingdom of God is near.   Truly, I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all has taken place.   Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away. Watch Yourselves   “But watch yourselves lest your hearts be weighed down with dissipation and drunkenness and cares of this life, and that day come upon you suddenly like a trap.   For it will come upon all who dwell on the face of the whole earth.   But stay awake at all times, praying that you may have strength to escape all these things that are going to take place, and to stand before the Son of Man.”

“Go and prepare the Passover for us, that we may eat it.”

“Behold, when you have entered the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him into the house that he enters   and tell the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says to you, Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?’   And he will show you a large upper room furnished; prepare it there.”  

“I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer.   For I tell you I will not eat it  until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.”

“Take this, and divide it among yourselves.   For I tell you that from now on I will not drink of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.”

“This is my body, which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of me.”

“This cup that is poured out for you is the new covenant in my blood.    But behold, the hand of him who betrays me is with me on the table.   For the Son of Man goes as it has been determined, but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed!”

“The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and those in authority over them are called benefactors.   But not so with you. Rather, let the greatest among you become as the youngest, and the leader as one who serves.   For who is the greater, one who reclines at table or one who serves? Is it not the one who reclines at table? But I am among you as the one who serves.   “You are those who have stayed with me in my trials,   and I assign to you, as my Father assigned to me, a kingdom,   that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Jesus Foretells Peter's Denial   “Simon, Simon, behold, Satan demanded to have you,  that he might sift you like wheat,   but I have prayed for you that your faith may not fail. And when you have turned again, strengthen your brothers.”

“I tell you, Peter, the rooster will not crow this day, until you deny three times that you know me.”

“When I sent you out with no moneybag or knapsack or sandals, did you lack anything?”

“But now let the one who has a moneybag take it, and likewise a knapsack. And let the one who has no sword sell his cloak and buy one.   For I tell you that this Scripture must be fulfilled in me: ‘And he was numbered with the transgressors.’ For what is written about me has its fulfillment.”

“It is enough.”
“Pray that you may not enter into temptation.”  
“Why are you sleeping? Rise and pray that you may not enter into temptation.”  
“Judas, would you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?”  
“No more of this!”

“Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs?   When I was with you day after day in the temple, you did not lay hands on me. But this is your hour, and the power of darkness.”  

“Before the rooster crows today, you will deny me three times.”  
“If I tell you, you will not believe,   and if I ask you, you will not answer.   But from now on the Son of Man shall be seated at the right hand of the power of God.”

“You say that I am.”  

“You have said so.”  

“Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children.   For behold, the days are coming when they will say, ‘Blessed are the barren and the wombs that never bore and the breasts that never nursed!’   Then they will begin to say to the mountains, ‘Fall on us,’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us.’   For if they do these things when the wood is green, what will happen when it is dry?”  


“Truly, I say to you, today you will be with me in paradise.”  

“Father, into your hands I commit my spirit!”

“What is this conversation that you are holding with each other as you walk?”

“What things?”

“O foolish ones, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken!   Was it not necessary that the Christ should suffer these things and enter into his glory?”  


“Peace to you!”  

“Why are you troubled, and why do doubts arise in your hearts?   See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself. Touch me, and see. For a spirit does not have flesh and bones as you see that I have.”  


“Have you anything here to eat?”  

“These are my words that I spoke to you while I was still with you, that everything written about me in the Law of Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms must be fulfilled.”  

“Thus it is written, that the Christ should suffer and on the third day rise from the dead,   and that repentance for  the forgiveness of sins should be proclaimed in his name to all nations, beginning from Jerusalem.   You are witnesses of these things.   And behold, I am sending the promise of my Father upon you. But stay in the city until you are clothed with power from on high.”

“What are you seeking?”

“Come and you will see.”

“You are Simon the son of John. You shall be called Cephas”

“Follow me.” 

“Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no deceit!”

“Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.”  

“Because I said to you, ‘I saw you under the fig tree,’ do you believe? You will see greater things than these.”   
“Truly, truly, I say to you,  you will see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.”

“Woman, what does this have to do with me? My hour has not yet come.”  

“Fill the jars with water.”

“Now draw some out and take it to the master of the feast.”

“Take these things away; do not make my Father's house a house of trade.”  

“Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.”  

“Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born again  he cannot see the kingdom of God.”

“Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God.   That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.    Do not marvel that I said to you, ‘You  must be born again.’   The wind  blows where it wishes, and you hear its sound, but you do not know where it comes from or where it goes. So it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit.”

“Are you the teacher of Israel and yet you do not understand these things?   Truly, truly, I say to you, we speak of what we know, and bear witness to what we have seen, but you  do not receive our testimony.   If I have told you earthly things and you do not believe, how can you believe if I tell you heavenly things?   No one has ascended into heaven except he who descended from heaven, the Son of Man.    And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up,   that whoever believes in him may have eternal life.  For God So Loved the World   “For God so loved the world,  that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.   For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through him.   Whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only Son of God.   And this is the judgment: the light has come into the world, and people loved the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil.   For everyone who does wicked things hates the light and does not come to the light, lest his works should be exposed.   But whoever does what is true comes to the light, so that it may be clearly seen that his works have been carried out in God.”

“Give me a drink.”  

“If you knew the gift of God, and who it is that is saying to you, ‘Give me a drink,’ you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.”  

“Everyone who drinks of this water will be thirsty again,   but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never be thirsty again.  The water that I will give him will become in him a spring of water welling up to eternal life.”

“Go, call your husband, and come here.”

“I have no husband.”

“You are right in saying, ‘I have no husband’;   for you have had five husbands, and the one you now have is not your husband. What you have said is true.”  


“Woman, believe me, the hour is coming when neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship the Father.   You worship what you do not know; we worship what we know, for salvation is from the Jews.   But the hour is coming, and is now here, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father is seeking such people to worship him.   God is spirit, and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth.”  

“I have food to eat that you do not know about.”  

“My food is to do the will of him who sent me and to accomplish his work.   Do you not say, ‘There are yet four months, then comes the harvest’? Look, I tell you, lift up your eyes, and see that the fields are white for harvest.   Already the one who reaps is receiving wages and gathering fruit for eternal life, so that sower and reaper may rejoice together.   For here the saying holds true, ‘One sows and another reaps.’   I sent you to reap that for which you did not labor. Others have labored, and you have entered into their labor.”  

“Unless you  see signs and wonders you will not believe.”
 

“Go; your son will live.”

“Your son will live.”

“Do you want to be healed?”  

“Get up, take up your bed, and walk.”  

“The man who healed me, that man said to me, ‘Take up your bed, and walk.’”

“Who is the man who said to you, ‘Take up your bed and walk’?”  

“See, you are well! Sin no more, that nothing worse may happen to you.”  

“My Father is working until now, and I am working.”  

“Truly, truly, I say to you, the Son can do nothing of his own accord, but only what he sees the Father doing. For whatever the Father  does, that the Son does likewise.   For the Father loves the Son and shows him all that he himself is doing. And greater works than these will he show him, so that you may marvel.   For as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, so also the Son gives life to whom he will.   For the Father judges no one, but has given all judgment to the Son,   that all may honor the Son, just as they honor the Father. Whoever does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him.   Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life. He does not come into judgment, but has passed from death to life.   “Truly, truly, I say to you, an hour is coming, and is now here, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will live.   For as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son also to have life in himself.   And he has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of Man.   Do not marvel at this, for an hour is coming when all who are in the tombs will hear his voice   and come out, those who have done good to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil to the resurrection of judgment. Witnesses to Jesus   “I can do nothing on my own. As I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just, because I seek not my own will but the will of him who sent me.   If I alone bear witness about myself, my testimony is not true.   There is another who bears witness about me, and I know that the testimony that he bears about me is true.   You sent to John, and he has borne witness to the truth.   Not that the testimony that I receive is from man, but I say these things so that you may be saved.   He was a burning and shining lamp, and you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light.   But the testimony that I have is greater than that of John. For the works that the Father has given me to accomplish, the very works that I am doing, bear witness about me that the Father has sent me.   And the Father who sent me has himself borne witness about me. His voice you have never heard, his form you have never seen,   and you do not have his word abiding in you, for you do not believe the one whom he has sent.   You search the Scriptures because you think that in them you have eternal life; and it is they that bear witness about me,   yet you refuse to come to me that you may have life.   I do not receive glory from people.   But I know that you do not have the love of God within you.   I have come in my Father's name, and you do not receive me. If another comes in his own name, you will receive him.   How can you believe, when you receive glory from one another and do not seek the glory that comes from the only God?   Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father. There is one who accuses you: Moses, on whom you have set your hope.   For if you believed Moses, you would believe me; for he wrote of me.   But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my words?” 

“Where are we to buy bread, so that these people may eat?”  

“Have the people sit down.”

“Gather up the leftover fragments, that nothing may be lost.”  

“It is I; do not be afraid.”  

“Truly, truly, I say to you, you are seeking me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate your fill of the loaves.   Do not work for the food that perishes, but for the food that endures to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give to you. For on him God the Father has set his seal.”  

“This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent.”  

“Truly, truly, I say to you, it was not Moses who gave you the bread from heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven.   For the bread of God is he who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.”  

“I am the bread of life; whoever comes to me shall not hunger, and whoever believes in me shall never thirst.   But I said to you that you have seen me and yet do not believe.   All that the Father gives me will come to me, and whoever comes to me I will never cast out.   For I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will but the will of him who sent me.   And this is the will of him who sent me, that I should lose nothing of all that he has given me, but raise it up on the last day.   For this is the will of my Father, that everyone who looks on the Son and believes in him should have eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.”

“I am the bread that came down from heaven.”

“Do not grumble among yourselves.   No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him. And I will raise him up on the last day.   It is written in the Prophets, ‘And they will all be taught by God.’ Everyone who has heard and learned from the Father comes to me—  not that anyone has seen the Father except he who is from God; he has seen the Father.   Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever believes has eternal life.   I am the bread of life.   Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and they died.   This is the bread that comes down from heaven, so that one may eat of it and not die.   I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. And the bread that I will give for the life of the world is my flesh.”  

“Truly, truly, I say to you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in you.   Whoever feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.   For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink.   Whoever feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me, and I in him.   As the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, so whoever feeds on me, he also will live because of me.   This is the bread that came down from heaven, not like the bread  the fathers ate, and died. Whoever feeds on this bread will live forever.”

“Do you take offense at this?   Then what if you were to see the Son of Man ascending to where he was before?   It is the Spirit who gives life; the flesh is no help at all. The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and life.   But there are some of you who do not believe.”

“This is why I told you that no one can come to me unless it is granted him by the Father.”  
“Do you want to go away as well?”  
“Did I not choose you, the twelve? And yet one of you is a devil.”  
“My time has not yet come, but your time is always here.   The world cannot hate you, but it hates me because I testify about it that its works are evil.   You go up to the feast. I am not  going up to this feast, for my time has not yet fully come.”

“My teaching is not mine, but his who sent me.   If anyone's will is to do God's  will, he will know whether the teaching is from God or whether I am speaking on my own authority.   The one who speaks on his own authority seeks his own glory; but the one who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true, and in him there is no falsehood.   Has not Moses given you the law? Yet none of you keeps the law. Why do you seek to kill me?”

“I did one work, and you all marvel at it.   Moses gave you circumcision (not that it is from Moses, but from the fathers), and you circumcise a man on the Sabbath.   If on the Sabbath a man receives circumcision, so that the law of Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me because on the Sabbath I made a man's whole body well?   Do not judge by appearances, but judge with right judgment.”  


“You know me, and you know where I come from. But I have not come of my own accord. He who sent me is true, and him you do not know.   I know him, for I come from him, and he sent me.”  

“I will be with you a little longer, and then I am going to him who sent me.   You will seek me and you will not find me. Where I am you cannot come.”  

“If anyone thirsts, let him come to me and drink.   Whoever believes in me, as  the Scripture has said, ‘Out of his heart will flow rivers of living water.’”

“Let him who is without sin among you be the first to throw a stone at her.”  

“Woman, where are they? Has no one condemned you?”

“Neither do I condemn you; go, and from now on sin no more.”

“I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will not walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.”  

“Even if I do bear witness about myself, my testimony is true, for I know where I came from and where I am going, but you do not know where I come from or where I am going.   You judge according to the flesh; I judge no one.   Yet even if I do judge, my judgment is true, for it is not I alone who judge, but I and the Father  who sent me.   In your Law it is written that the testimony of two people is true.   I am the one who bears witness about myself, and the Father who sent me bears witness about me.”

“You know neither me nor my Father. If you knew me, you would know my Father also.”

“I am going away, and you will seek me, and you will die in your sin. Where I am going, you cannot come.”

“Will he kill himself, since he says, ‘Where I am going, you cannot come’?”

“You are from below; I am from above. You are of this world; I am not of this world.   I told you that you would die in your sins, for unless you believe that I am he you will die in your sins.”

“Who are you?”

“Just what I have been telling you from the beginning.   I have much to say about you and much to judge, but he who sent me is true, and I declare to the world what I have heard from him.”

“When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am he, and that I do nothing on my own authority, but speak just as the Father taught me.   And he who sent me is with me. He has not left me alone, for I always do the things that are pleasing to him.”  

“If you abide in my word, you are truly my disciples,   and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”“We are offspring of Abraham and have never been enslaved to anyone. How is it that you say, ‘You will become free’?” 
“Truly, truly, I say to you, everyone who practices sin is a slave  to sin.   The slave does not remain in the house forever; the son remains forever.   So if the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed.   I know that you are offspring of Abraham; yet you seek to kill me because my word finds no place in you.   I speak of what I have seen with my Father, and you do what you have heard from your father.”

“Abraham is our father.”

“If you were Abraham's children, you would be doing the works Abraham did,   but now you seek to kill me, a man who has told you the truth that I heard from God. This is not what Abraham did.   You are doing the works your father did.”

“We were not born of sexual immorality. We have one Father—even God.”

“If God were your Father, you would love me, for I came from God and I am here. I came not of my own accord, but he sent me.   Why do you not understand what I say? It is because you cannot bear to hear my word.   You are of your father the devil, and your will is to do your father's desires. He was a murderer from the beginning, and does not stand in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he lies, he speaks out of his own character, for he is a liar and the father of lies.   But because I tell the truth, you do not believe me.   Which one of you convicts me of sin? If I tell the truth, why do you not believe me?   Whoever is of God hears the words of God. The reason why you do not hear them is that you are not of God.”

“I do not have a demon, but I honor my Father, and you dishonor me.   Yet I do not seek my own glory; there is One who seeks it, and he is the judge.   Truly, truly, I say to you, if anyone keeps my word, he will never see death.”  

“If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is my Father who glorifies me, of whom you say, ‘He is our God.’    But you have not known him. I know him. If I were to say that I do not know him, I would be a liar like you, but I do know him and I keep his word.   Your father Abraham rejoiced that he would see my day. He saw it and was glad.” 

“Truly, truly, I say to you, before Abraham was, I am.”  

“It was not that this man sinned, or his parents, but that the works of God might be displayed in him.   We must work the works of him who sent me while it is day; night is coming, when no one can work.   As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.”  
“Go, wash in the pool of Siloam”

“The man called Jesus made mud and anointed my eyes and said to me, ‘Go to Siloam and wash.’ So I went and washed and received my sight.”  

“Do you believe in the Son of Man?”

“You have seen him, and it is he who is speaking to you.”  
“For judgment I came into this world, that those who do not see may see, and those who see may become blind.”  

“Truly, truly, I say to you, he who does not enter the sheepfold by the door but climbs in by another way, that man is a thief and a robber.   But he who enters by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.   To him the gatekeeper opens. The sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.   When he has brought out all his own, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice.   A stranger they will not follow, but they will flee from him, for they do not know the voice of strangers.”  

“Truly, truly, I say to you, I am the door of the sheep.   All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them.   I am the door. If anyone enters by me, he will be saved and will go in and out and find pasture.   The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy. I came that they may have life and have it abundantly.   I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.   He who is a hired hand and not a shepherd, who does not own the sheep, sees the wolf coming and leaves the sheep and flees, and the wolf snatches them and scatters them.   He flees because he is a hired hand and cares nothing for the sheep.   I am the good shepherd. I know my own and my own know me,   just as the Father knows me and I know the Father; and I lay down my life for the sheep.   And I have other sheep that are not of this fold. I must bring them also, and they will listen to my voice. So there will be one flock, one shepherd.   For this reason the Father loves me, because I lay down my life that I may take it up again.   No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of my own accord. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to take it up again. This charge I have received from my Father.”  

“I told you, and you do not believe. The works that I do in my Father's name bear witness about me,   but you do not believe because you are not among my sheep.   My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.   I give them eternal life, and they will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand.   My Father, who has given them to me,  is greater than all, and no one is able to snatch them out of the Father's hand.   I and the Father are one.”

“I have shown you many good works from the Father; for which of them are you going to stone me?”  
“Is it not written in your Law, ‘I said, you are gods’?   If he called them gods to whom the word of God came—and Scripture cannot be broken—  do you say of him whom the Father consecrated and sent into the world, ‘You are blaspheming,’ because I said, ‘I am the Son of God’?   If I am not doing the works of my Father, then do not believe me;   but if I do them, even though you do not believe me, believe the works, that you may know and understand that the Father is in me and I am in the Father.”  
“This illness does not lead to death. It is for the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified through it.”  
“Let us go to Judea again.”  
“Are there not twelve hours in the day? If anyone walks in the day, he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world.   But if anyone walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light is not in him.”

“Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep, but I go to awaken him.”  
“Lazarus has died,   and for your sake I am glad that I was not there, so that you may believe. But let us go to him.”  
“Your brother will rise again.”  
“I am the resurrection and the life.  Whoever believes in me, though he die, yet shall he live,   and everyone who lives and believes in me shall never die. Do you believe this?”

“Where have you laid him?”

“Take away the stone.”

“Did I not tell you that if you believed you would see the glory of God?”

“Father, I thank you that you have heard me.   I knew that you always hear me, but I said this on account of the people standing around, that they may believe that you sent me.”

“Lazarus, come out.”

“Unbind him, and let him go.”  
“Leave her alone, so that she may keep it  for the day of my burial.   For the poor you always have with you, but you do not always have me.”

“The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified.   Truly, truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit.   Whoever loves his life loses it, and whoever hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life.   If anyone serves me, he must follow me; and where I am, there will my servant be also. If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him. The Son of Man Must Be Lifted Up   “Now is my soul troubled. And what shall I say? ‘Father, save me from this hour’? But for this purpose I have come to this hour.   Father, glorify your name.”

“I have glorified it, and I will glorify it again.”  

“This voice has come for your sake, not mine.   Now is the judgment of this world; now will the ruler of this world be cast out.   And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.”  


“The light is among you for a little while longer. Walk while you have the light, lest darkness overtake you. The one who walks in the darkness does not know where he is going.   While you have the light, believe in the light, that you may become sons of light.”

“Whoever believes in me, believes not in me but in him who sent me.   And whoever sees me sees him who sent me.   I have come into the world as light, so that whoever believes in me may not remain in darkness.   If anyone hears my words and does not keep them, I do not judge him; for I did not come to judge the world but to save the world.   The one who rejects me and does not receive my words has a judge; the word that I have spoken will judge him on the last day.   For I have not spoken on my own authority, but the Father who sent me has himself given me a commandment—what to say and what to speak.   And I know that his commandment is eternal life. What I say, therefore, I say as the Father has told me.”  

“What I am doing you do not understand now, but afterward you will understand.”

“If I do not wash you, you have no share with me.”  

“The one who has bathed does not need to wash, except for his feet,  but is completely clean. And you  are clean, but not every one of you.”

“Not all of you are clean.”

“Do you understand what I have done to you?   You call me Teacher and Lord, and you are right, for so I am.   If I then, your Lord and Teacher, have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another's feet.   For I have given you an example, that you also should do just as I have done to you.   Truly, truly, I say to you, a servant  is not greater than his master, nor is a messenger greater than the one who sent him.   If you know these things, blessed are you if you do them.   I am not speaking of all of you; I know whom I have chosen. But the Scripture will be fulfilled,  ‘He who ate my bread has lifted his heel against me.’   I am telling you this now, before it takes place, that when it does take place you may believe that I am he.   Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever receives the one I send receives me, and whoever receives me receives the one who sent me.”

“Truly, truly, I say to you, one of you will betray me.”

“It is he to whom I will give this morsel of bread when I have dipped it.”

“What you are going to do, do quickly.”  


“Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified in him.   If God is glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself, and glorify him at once.   Little children, yet a little while I am with you. You will seek me, and just as I said to the Jews, so now I also say to you, ‘Where I am going you cannot come.’   A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another: just as I have loved you, you also are to love one another.   By this all people will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another.”

“Where I am going you cannot follow me now, but you will follow afterward.”

“Will you lay down your life for me? Truly, truly, I say to you, the rooster will not crow till you have denied me three times.  

“Let not your hearts be troubled. Believe in God;  believe also in me.   In my Father's house are many rooms. If it were not so, would I have told you that I go to prepare a place for you?    And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and will take you to myself, that where I am you may be also.   And you know the way to where I am going.”

“I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.   If you had known me, you would have known my Father also.  From now on you do know him and have seen him.”

“Have I been with you so long, and you still do not know me, Philip? Whoever has seen me has seen the Father. How can you say, ‘Show us the Father’?   Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words that I say to you I do not speak on my own authority, but the Father who dwells in me does his works.   Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father is in me, or else believe on account of the works themselves.   “Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever believes in me will also do the works that I do; and greater works than these will he do, because I am going to the Father.   Whatever you ask in my name, this I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.   If you ask me  anything in my name, I will do it. Jesus Promises the Holy Spirit   “If you love me, you will keep my commandments.   And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Helper,  to be with you forever,   even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it neither sees him nor knows him. You know him, for he dwells with you and will be  in you.   “I will not leave you as orphans; I will come to you.   Yet a little while and the world will see me no more, but you will see me. Because I live, you also will live.   In that day you will know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you.   Whoever has my commandments and keeps them, he it is who loves me. And he who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and manifest myself to him.” 

“I have said all these things to you to keep you from falling away.   They will put you out of the synagogues. Indeed, the hour is coming when whoever kills you will think he is offering service to God.   And they will do these things because they have not known the Father, nor me.   But I have said these things to you, that when their hour comes you may remember that I told them to you. The Work of the Holy Spirit “I did not say these things to you from the beginning, because I was with you.   But now I am going to him who sent me, and none of you asks me, ‘Where are you going?’   But because I have said these things to you, sorrow has filled your heart.   Nevertheless, I tell you the truth: it is to your advantage that I go away, for if I do not go away, the Helper will not come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you.   And when he comes, he will convict the world concerning sin and righteousness and judgment:   concerning sin, because they do not believe in me;   concerning righteousness, because I go to the Father, and you will see me no longer;   concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world is judged.   “I still have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now.   When the Spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all the truth, for he will not speak on his own authority, but whatever he hears he will speak, and he will declare to you the things that are to come.   He will glorify me, for he will take what is mine and declare it to you.   All that the Father has is mine; therefore I said that he will take what is mine and declare it to you. Your Sorrow Will Turn into Joy   “A little while, and you will see me no longer; and again a little while, and you will see me.”

“Is this what you are asking yourselves, what I meant by saying, ‘A little while and you will not see me, and again a little while and you will see me’?   Truly, truly, I say to you, you will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice. You will be sorrowful, but your sorrow will turn into joy.   When a woman is giving birth, she has sorrow because her hour has come, but when she has delivered the baby, she no longer remembers the anguish, for joy that a human being has been born into the world.   So also you have sorrow now, but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take your joy from you.   In that day you will ask nothing of me. Truly, truly, I say to you, whatever you ask of the Father in my name, he will give it to you.   Until now you have asked nothing in my name. Ask, and you will receive, that your joy may be full. I Have Overcome the World   “I have said these things to you in figures of speech. The hour is coming when I will no longer speak to you in figures of speech but will tell you plainly about the Father.   In that day you will ask in my name, and I do not say to you that I will ask the Father on your behalf;   for the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me and have believed that I came from God.    I came from the Father and have come into the world, and now I am leaving the world and going to the Father.”

“Do you now believe?   Behold, the hour is coming, indeed it has come, when you will be scattered, each to his own home, and will leave me alone. Yet I am not alone, for the Father is with me.   I have said these things to you, that in me you may have peace. In the world you will have tribulation. But take heart; I have overcome the world.”  


“Father, the hour has come; glorify your Son that the Son may glorify you,   since you have given him authority over all flesh, to give eternal life to all whom you have given him.   And this is eternal life, that they know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom you have sent.   I glorified you on earth, having accomplished the work that you gave me to do.   And now, Father, glorify me in your own presence with the glory that I had with you before the world existed.   “I have manifested your name to the people whom you gave me out of the world. Yours they were, and you gave them to me, and they have kept your word.   Now they know that everything that you have given me is from you.   For I have given them the words that you gave me, and they have received them and have come to know in truth that I came from you; and they have believed that you sent me.   I am praying for them. I am not praying for the world but for those whom you have given me, for they are yours.   All mine are yours, and yours are mine, and I am glorified in them.   And I am no longer in the world, but they are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, keep them in your name, which you have given me, that they may be one, even as we are one.   While I was with them, I kept them in your name, which you have given me. I have guarded them, and not one of them has been lost except the son of destruction, that the Scripture might be fulfilled.   But now I am coming to you, and these things I speak in the world, that they may have my joy fulfilled in themselves.   I have given them your word, and the world has hated them because they are not of the world, just as I am not of the world.   I do not ask that you take them out of the world, but that you keep them from the evil one.    They are not of the world, just as I am not of the world.   Sanctify them  in the truth; your word is truth.   As you sent me into the world, so I have sent them into the world.   And for their sake I consecrate myself,  that they also may be sanctified  in truth.   “I do not ask for these only, but also for those who will believe in me through their word,   that they may all be one, just as you, Father, are in me, and I in you, that they also may be in us, so that the world may believe that you have sent me.   The glory that you have given me I have given to them, that they may be one even as we are one,   I in them and you in me, that they may become perfectly one, so that the world may know that you sent me and loved them even as you loved me.   Father, I desire that they also, whom you have given me, may be with me where I am, to see my glory that you have given me because you loved me before the foundation of the world.   O righteous Father, even though the world does not know you, I know you, and these know that you have sent me.   I made known to them your name, and I will continue to make it known, that the love with which you have loved me may be in them, and I in them.”

“Put your sword into its sheath; shall I not drink the cup that the Father has given me?”  

“I have spoken openly to the world. I have always taught in synagogues and in the temple, where all Jews come together. I have said nothing in secret.   Why do you ask me? Ask those who have heard me what I said to them; they know what I said.”  

“If what I said is wrong, bear witness about the wrong; but if what I said is right, why do you strike me?”  

“Do you say this of your own accord, or did others say it to you about me?”  

“My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would have been fighting, that I might not be delivered over to the Jews. But my kingdom is not from the world.”

“You say that I am a king. For this purpose I was born and for this purpose I have come into the world—to bear witness to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my voice.”  

“You would have no authority over me at all unless it had been given you from above. Therefore he who delivered me over to you has the greater sin.”  

“Woman, behold, your son!”
“Behold, your mother!”
“I thirst.”  
“It is finished,”

“Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are you seeking?”

“Do not cling to me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father; but go to my brothers and say to them, ‘I am ascending to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.’”

“Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me, even so I am sending you.”

“Receive the Holy Spirit.   If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them; if you withhold forgiveness from any, it is withheld.”  


“Peace be with you.”

“Put your finger here, and see my hands; and put out your hand, and place it in my side. Do not disbelieve, but believe.”

“Have you believed because you have seen me? Blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed.”  

“Children, do you have any fish?”

“Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and you will find some.”

“Bring some of the fish that you have just caught.”  

“Come and have breakfast.”

“Simon, son of John, do you love me more than these?”

“Feed my lambs.”
“Simon, son of John, do you love me?”

“Tend my sheep.” 

“Simon, son of John, do you love me?”

“Feed my sheep.   Truly, truly, I say to you, when you were young, you used to dress yourself and walk wherever you wanted, but when you are old, you will stretch out your hands, and another will dress you and carry you where you do not want to go.”

“Follow me.”  

“If it is my will that he remain until I come, what is that to you? You follow me!”  
“If it is my will that he remain until I come, what is that to you?”

“you heard from me;   for John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with  the Holy Spirit not many days from now.” 

“It is not for you to know times or seasons that the Father has fixed by his own authority.  
“Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?”

“I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.   But rise and enter the city, and you will be told what you are to do.”  
“Ananias.”

“Rise and go to the street called Straight, and at the house of Judas look for a man of Tarsus named Saul, for behold, he is praying,   and he has seen in a vision a man named Ananias come in and lay his hands on him so that he might regain his sight.”  

“Go, for he is a chosen instrument of mine to carry my name before the Gentiles and kings and the children of Israel.   For I will show him how much he must suffer for the sake of my name.”  

“Do not be afraid, but go on speaking and do not be silent,   for I am with you, and no one will attack you to harm you, for I have many in this city who are my people.”  

“Take courage, for as you have testified to the facts about me in Jerusalem, so you must testify also in Rome.”  


“This is my body, which is for  you. Do this in remembrance of me.”

“This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me.” 

“I am the Alpha and the Omega,”
“who is and who was and who is to come, the Almighty.”  
“Write what you see in a book and send it to the seven churches, to Ephesus and to Smyrna and to Pergamum and to Thyatira and to Sardis and to Philadelphia and to Laodicea.”  

“Fear not, I am the first and the last,   and the living one. I died, and behold I am alive forevermore, and I have the keys of Death and Hades.   Write therefore the things that you have seen, those that are and those that are to take place after this.   As for the mystery of the seven stars that you saw in my right hand, and the seven golden lampstands, the seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lampstands are the seven churches.  
Revelation 2 To the Church in Ephesus   “To the angel of the church in Ephesus write: ‘The words of him who holds the seven stars in his right hand, who walks among the seven golden lampstands.   “‘I know your works, your toil and your patient endurance, and how you cannot bear with those who are evil, but have tested those who call themselves apostles and are not, and found them to be false.   I know you are enduring patiently and bearing up for my name's sake, and you have not grown weary.   But I have this against you, that you have abandoned the love you had at first.   Remember therefore from where you have fallen; repent, and do the works you did at first. If not, I will come to you and remove your lampstand from its place, unless you repent.   Yet this you have: you hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.   He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the one who conquers I will grant to eat of the tree of life, which is in the paradise of God.’ To the Church in Smyrna   “And to the angel of the church in Smyrna write: ‘The words of the first and the last, who died and came to life.   “‘I know your tribulation and your poverty (but you are rich) and the slander  of those who say that they are Jews and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.   Do not fear what you are about to suffer. Behold, the devil is about to throw some of you into prison, that you may be tested, and for ten days you will have tribulation. Be faithful unto death, and I will give you the crown of life.   He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. The one who conquers will not be hurt by the second death.’ To the Church in Pergamum   “And to the angel of the church in Pergamum write: ‘The words of him who has the sharp two-edged sword.   “‘I know where you dwell, where Satan's throne is. Yet you hold fast my name, and you did not deny my faith  even in the days of Antipas my faithful witness, who was killed among you, where Satan dwells.   But I have a few things against you: you have some there who hold the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to put a stumbling block before the sons of Israel, so that they might eat food sacrificed to idols and practice sexual immorality.   So also you have some who hold the teaching of the Nicolaitans.   Therefore repent. If not, I will come to you soon and war against them with the sword of my mouth.   He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the one who conquers I will give some of the hidden manna, and I will give him a white stone, with a new name written on the stone that no one knows except the one who receives it.’ To the Church in Thyatira   “And to the angel of the church in Thyatira write: ‘The words of the Son of God, who has eyes like a flame of fire, and whose feet are like burnished bronze.   “‘I know your works, your love and faith and service and patient endurance, and that your latter works exceed the first.   But I have this against you, that you tolerate that woman Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess and is teaching and seducing my servants to practice sexual immorality and to eat food sacrificed to idols.   I gave her time to repent, but she refuses to repent of her sexual immorality.   Behold, I will throw her onto a sickbed, and those who commit adultery with her I will throw into great tribulation, unless they repent of her works,   and I will strike her children dead. And all the churches will know that I am he who searches mind and heart, and I will give to each of you according to your works.   But to the rest of you in Thyatira, who do not hold this teaching, who have not learned what some call the deep things of Satan, to you I say, I do not lay on you any other burden.   Only hold fast what you have until I come.   The one who conquers and who keeps my works until the end, to him I will give authority over the nations,   and he will rule  them with a rod of iron, as when earthen pots are broken in pieces, even as I myself have received authority from my Father.   And I will give him the morning star.   He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.’


“And to the angel of the church in Sardis write: ‘The words of him who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars. “‘I know your works. You have the reputation of being alive, but you are dead.   Wake up, and strengthen what remains and is about to die, for I have not found your works complete in the sight of my God.   Remember, then, what you received and heard. Keep it, and repent. If you will not wake up, I will come like a thief, and you will not know at what hour I will come against you.   Yet you have still a few names in Sardis, people who have not soiled their garments, and they will walk with me in white, for they are worthy.   The one who conquers will be clothed thus in white garments, and I will never blot his name out of the book of life. I will confess his name before my Father and before his angels.   He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.’ To the Church in Philadelphia   “And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write: ‘The words of the holy one, the true one, who has the key of David, who opens and no one will shut, who shuts and no one opens.   “‘I know your works. Behold, I have set before you an open door, which no one is able to shut. I know that you have but little power, and yet you have kept my word and have not denied my name.   Behold, I will make those of the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews and are not, but lie—behold, I will make them come and bow down before your feet, and they will learn that I have loved you.   Because you have kept my word about patient endurance, I will keep you from the hour of trial that is coming on the whole world, to try those who dwell on the earth.   I am coming soon. Hold fast what you have, so that no one may seize your crown.   The one who conquers, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God. Never shall he go out of it, and I will write on him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down from my God out of heaven, and my own new name.   He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.’ To the Church in Laodicea   “And to the angel of the church in Laodicea write: ‘The words of the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of God's creation.   “‘I know your works: you are neither cold nor hot. Would that you were either cold or hot!   So, because you are lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I will spit you out of my mouth.   For you say, I am rich, I have prospered, and I need nothing, not realizing that you are wretched, pitiable, poor, blind, and naked.   I counsel you to buy from me gold refined by fire, so that you may be rich, and white garments so that you may clothe yourself and the shame of your nakedness may not be seen, and salve to anoint your eyes, so that you may see.   Those whom I love, I reprove and discipline, so be zealous and repent.   Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will come in to him and eat with him, and he with me.   The one who conquers, I will grant him to sit with me on my throne, as I also conquered and sat down with my Father on his throne.   He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.’”  
“And behold, I am coming soon. Blessed is the one who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.”  
“Behold, I am coming soon, bringing my recompense with me, to repay each one for what he has done.   I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.”  
“I, Jesus, have sent my angel to testify to you about these things for the churches. I am the root and the descendant of David, the bright morning star.”  
“Surely I am coming soon.”